
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74710 ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Superscripted
characters are preceded by ‘^’, and if there are multiple characters
they are contained by ‘{ }’. There is a several instances of ‘m’ with a
macron, which appears here as ‘m̄’.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the chapter in which they are
referenced.

Footnotes were numbered beginning afresh with each chapter. They have
been resequenced across the entire text for uniqueness. On occasion,
notes are cross-referenced by number. These references have been changed
as well.

In Appendix II (pp. 410-427), a lengthy poem is presented with the
Gaelic and the English translations on facing pages, so that the reader
may readily compare them. They are too wide to give column-wise here. To
honor the intent of the author, this section has been reorganized to
give each verse and its translation together, the English following the
Gaelic in staggered fashion. On the last page of each version, (pp.
426-427), there is, on each page, a _Notes_ section at the bottom. These
have been combined to follow the last of the passages.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.




                            CELTIC SCOTLAND








         _Edinburgh: Printed by Thomas and Archibald Constable_

                                  FOR

                             DAVID DOUGLAS.




     LONDON                 SIMPKIN, HAMILTON, KENT, AND CO., LIM.
     CAMBRIDGE                                MACMILLAN AND BOWES.
     GLASGOW                             JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  SCOTLAND
  with the
  ANCIENT DIVISIONS
  Of THE LAND.
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CELTIC SCOTLAND:

                              A HISTORY OF
                         =Ancient Alban=




                                   BY
                    WILLIAM F. SKENE, D.C.L., LL.D.
                  HISTORIOGRAPHER-ROYAL FOR SCOTLAND.


                              VOLUME III.

                            LAND AND PEOPLE.


                           _SECOND EDITION_.

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS
                                  1890


                         _All Rights reserved_




                     PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


A new edition of this the third and last volume of Celtic Scotland
having now been called for, the author is glad to have this opportunity
of correcting any mistakes of the press which have occurred in it. As
this volume deals with the early land tenures and social condition of
the Celtic inhabitants of Scotland, in which a number of obsolete terms
and old Celtic words occur, it is peculiarly liable to mistakes of this
kind, and the author has revised the text in this view with great care,
but he does not find that he has any material alteration to make in the
views he has expressed, or the conclusions he has come to, as these are,
in fact, the outcome of years of careful research into this very obscure
subject.

  EDINBURGH, 27 INVERLEITH ROW,
      _7th July 1890_.




                     PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


This volume completes the task which the author set before himself of
illustrating the history of Scotland during the Celtic period, when it
bore the name of Alban, and of endeavouring to dispel those fables which
have hitherto obscured it. Like the other volumes, this third volume
forms in itself a substantive work. Its title is ‘Land and People,’ and
its subject, ‘The early land tenures and social condition of the Celtic
inhabitants of Scotland’ (vol. i. p. 28). The real history of a country
may be said only truly to commence when we come to deal with the social
and political organisation of its population. The ethnology of the
nations which compose it—the history of its kings, their reigns, and the
various wars in which they engaged—the extension or restriction of the
frontiers of their kingdom—the introduction of Christianity and the
establishment of a Christian Church, are all great landmarks and
important features of its history; but still they are merely the outward
bulwarks of the kingdom as a whole, and present it to us in its external
relations only. Till we know something of the distribution within the
country of the various races which formed its population, their relative
growth and decay, their social organisation, and the extent to which its
peculiar features were preserved, and influenced and coloured the future
condition of the entire population formed by the amalgamation of its
various elements, we know little of its real history.

To supply, at least to some extent, this information is the main purpose
of the present volume, which the author fears has been very inadequately
carried into effect, and its publication has been from unavoidable
causes delayed much beyond the period when it ought to have appeared. It
was commenced two years ago, when its progress was interrupted partly
owing to his illness, under the depressing influence of which part of
the volume has indeed been written, but mainly because the publication
of the fourth volume of the Ancient Irish Laws, which was to contain
tracts relating to the early land tenure in Ireland, had likewise been
unavoidably delayed, and the author felt that, without consulting these
tracts, he could not satisfactorily treat of the old tribal system from
which the ancient Celtic land tenures in Scotland derived their origin,
and without a knowledge of which their true character could hardly be
ascertained. The author was, however, at length enabled to complete this
part of his volume through the courtesy of the editor, who, with the
kind permission of the Lord Bishop of Limerick, chairman of the Brehon
Law Commission, communicated to him the proof-sheets of the text and
translation of these tracts, but it was not till after this volume had
in the main been printed, and was almost through the press, that the
fourth volume of the Ancient Laws of Ireland was at length published,
and the author had any opportunity of reading the introduction; and thus
in compiling that part of his volume he had unfortunately not the
benefit of the learned editor’s commentary upon these tracts.

The author has to record his thanks to his friends: Mr. Alexander
Carmichael for the instructive account of three of the Long Island
townships embodied in the last chapter; W. M. Hennessy, Esq., of the
Public Record Office, Dublin, for the curious poem relating to the
Kingdom of the Isles, with its translation; and Captain Thomas for the
old description of the Isles, both printed in the Appendix, Nos. II. and
III. He has also, as formerly, to thank Mr. John Taylor Brown for his
ready aid in revising his proof-sheets; and he takes this opportunity
when completing his work of recording his sense of the valuable
assistance and advice he has received throughout from his excellent
publisher, Mr. David Douglas.

The volume containing the History and Ethnology of the kingdom was
brought down to the end of the reign of Alexander the Third, the last of
the old dynasty of Celtic monarchs, which terminated with his death in
the year 1284, and it is with the same reign that our narrative in
treating of the ‘Land and People’ must now commence.

  EDINBURGH, 27 INVERLEITH ROW,
      _1st October 1880_.

                           TABLE OF CONTENTS.

                                -------

                                 BOOK III.
                             _LAND AND PEOPLE_.

                                 CHAPTER I.

               SCOTLAND IN THE REIGN OF ALEXANDER THE THIRD.
                                                                       PAGE
 Consolidation of the provinces of Scotland into one feudal monarchy
   completed in this reign,                                               1
 Southern frontier of Scotland,                                           3
 English possessions of the Scottish kings,                               5
 Northern boundary of Scotland,                                           7
 Physical aspect of Scotland in the reign of Alexander the Third,         9
 Population of Scotland in the reign of Alexander the Third composed
   of six races,                                                         15
 Indigenous races of the Britons and Picts,                              16
 Colonising races of Scots and Angles,                                   17
 Intruding races of Danes, Norwegians, and Normans,                      18
 Influence of foreign races on native population,                        18
 Foreign elements introduced into population of Pictish and Cambrian
   territories,                                                          20
 Spread of Teutonic people over them,                                    21
 Norwegian kingdom of the Isles,                                         28
 The Gallgaidheal,                                                       29
 The Estates of the Realm in 1283,                                       39
 Distinction of population into Teutonic Lowlanders and Gaelic
   Highlanders,                                                          40

                                CHAPTER II.

                      THE SEVEN PROVINCES OF SCOTLAND.

 Old division of Scotia into provinces,                                  42
 Seven provinces in the eighth century,                                  42
 Seven provinces in the tenth century,                                   44
 Districts ruled by kings and afterwards by Mormaers,                    49
      Petty kings of Argyll and Galloway,                                51
      Jarl Thorfinn,                                                     52
      Mormaers termed by Norwegians, Jarls,                              54
      Mormaers of Buchan, from the Book of Deer,                         55
      Toisechs of Buchan,                                                56
 Seven Earls first appear in reign of Alexander the First,               58
 Policy of David I. to feudalise Celtic earldoms,                        63
 Creation of additional earldoms,                                        66
      Earldom of Mar,                                                    68
      Earldoms of Garvyach and Levenach,                                 69
      Earldoms of Ross and Carrick,                                      70
      Earldom of Caithness,                                              71
 Seven Earls in the reign of Alexander the Second,                       71
 Province of Argyll,                                                     78
 Seven Earls in the reign of Alexander the Third,                        80
 State of the land in the reign of Alexander the Third,                  83
 The Crown demesne,                                                      84
 District of Argyll divided into sheriffdoms,                            88

                                CHAPTER III.

                             LEGENDARY ORIGINS.

 The problem to be solved,                                               90
 Early traditions,                                                       90
 Ethnic legends,                                                         91
 Linguistic legends,                                                     96
 Historical legends,                                                     97
 Artificial character of early Irish history,                            97
 Cymric legends,                                                        100
 Legendary origin of transmarine tribes,                                104
 The Nemedians in Scotland,                                             105
 The Firbolg and Tuath De Danan in Scotland,                            105
 Pictish legends,                                                       107
 The Milesians in Scotland,                                             108
 The race of Ith in Scotland,                                           111
 The race of Colla in Scotland,                                         113
 The last three pagan kings of Ireland in Scotland,                     114
 How far have these legends a historic basis?                           120
 Early connection between Scotland and Ireland,                         125
 The twofold division of the Picts and the establishment of Scone as
   the capital of the kingdom,                                          132

                                CHAPTER IV.

                       THE TUATH OR TRIBE IN IRELAND.

 Mixed population of Scotland,                                          135
 Sources of information as to their early social state,                 136
 Tribal organisation of the Gaelic race,                                136
 Influences affecting the tribe in Ireland,                             137
 Effect of introduction of Christianity,                                138
 Land originally held in common,                                        139
 Distinction of ranks in the tribe,                                     139
      The Ri or king,                                                   140
      Distinction of ranks arising from possession of cattle,           142
      Origin and growth of private property, and creation of an order
        of territorial chiefs,                                          144
      The Ceile or tenants of a chief,                                  145
 State of the Tuath or territory of a tribe,                            147
      The Dun or fort,                                                  148
 The Mortuath,                                                          149
 The Cuicidh or province,                                               149
 The law of Tanistry,                                                   150
 Connection between superiors and dependants,                           150
 The system of fines,                                                   151
      The Honor price,                                                  152
 System of land measures,                                               153
 Later state of the tribes,                                             157

                                 CHAPTER V.

            THE FINÉ OR SEPT IN IRELAND, AND THE TRIBE IN WALES.

 Origin of the Finé or Sept,                                            171
 The Ciné or kinsfolk,                                                  171
 The Ceile or tenants,                                                  172
 The Fuidhir or stranger septs,                                         173
 Territorial basis of Finé,                                             175
 The four families of the Ciné or kinsfolk,                             176
      Members of the four families,                                     179
      The Geilfiné chief,                                               180
      Relation of Geilfiné chief to the Ri Tuath,                       184
      Law of Succession,                                                187
      Sluaged or hosting,                                               188
      Fosterage,                                                        190
 Later state of the Finés,                                              192
 The Tribe in Wales,                                                    197
 Fines for Slaughter,                                                   204
 The sept in Wales,                                                     205
 Fosterage in Wales,                                                    207

                                CHAPTER VI.

                           THE TRIBE IN SCOTLAND.

 Early notices of tribal organisation,                                  209
 The tribe among the Picts,                                             210
 The tribe in Dalriada,                                                 212
 The tribe in Galloway,                                                 214
 Modification of original tribes under foreign influences,              214
 Passing of the Mortuath into the Earldom, and the Tribe into the
   Thanage,                                                             215
 Distinction of people into free and servile classes,                   216
 Classes of freemen,                                                    217
 Ranks of bondmen,                                                      220
 Measures of land,                                                      223
 Burdens on the land,                                                   227
      The Cain or Can,                                                  228
      Conveth,                                                          232
      Expedition and hosting,                                           234
 Assimilation to feudal forms,                                          236
 Tenure in feu-farm,                                                    237
 Ranks of society on Crown lands,                                       238

                                CHAPTER VII.

                     THE THANAGES AND THEIR EXTINCTION.

 Review of the Thanages and their conversion into Baronies,             246
      Thanages in Moray and Ross,                                       247
      Thanages in Mar and Buchan,                                       250
      Thanages in Angus and Mearns,                                     257
      Thanages in Fife and Fothriff,                                    267
      Thanages in Stratherne,                                           269
      Thanages in Atholl,                                               270
      Thanages in Gowry,                                                274
      Thanages south of the Forth,                                      277
 Toshachdor and Toshachdera,                                            278
 Result of survey of thanages,                                          281

                               CHAPTER VIII.

                       THE FINÉ OR CLAN IN SCOTLAND.

 Clanship in the Highlands,                                             284
 The Highland Line,                                                     285
 Break-up of the Celtic Earldoms,                                       286
      Moray,                                                            287
      Buchan,                                                           287
      Atholl,                                                           288
      Angus,                                                            289
      Menteath and Stratherne,                                          290
      Mar,                                                              291
      Ross,                                                             291
      The Gallgaidheal and their lords,                                 292
      Lennox,                                                           300
 The Toshachdoracht,                                                    300
 First appearance of Clans,                                             302
 Clan Macduff and its privileges,                                       303
 Description of Highlanders—1363-1383,                                  307
 Raid into Angus in 1391,                                               308
 Combat of two clans on North Inch of Perth in 1396,                    310
 The Clan Chattan and Clan Cameron,                                     313
 The Chief and the Kinsmen,                                             318
 The native-men,                                                        318
 Fosterage,                                                             321
 The Clan and its Members,                                              323

                                CHAPTER IX.

                      THE CLANS AND THEIR GENEALOGIES.

 State of the Highlands in the sixteenth century,                       326
 Names and position of the clans,                                       327
 Meaning of ‘Clann,’ and the personal names from which their
   patronymics were taken,                                              331
 Original importance and position of Clan pedigrees,                    334
 First change in Clan pedigrees. Influence of legendary history of
   Scotland,                                                            336
 Second change. Influence of Irish Sennachies,                          337
 Analysis of the Irish Pedigrees,                                       338
 Artificial character of these pedigrees,                               346
 Third Change. Influence of Act 1597,                                   346
 Spurious Pedigrees,                                                    349
 Result of Analysis of Pedigrees,                                       364
 Termination of Clanship in the Highlands,                              365

                                 CHAPTER X.

    LAND TENURE IN THE HIGHLANDS AND ISLANDS SUBSEQUENT TO THE SIXTEENTH
                                  CENTURY.

 Changes in tenure of land,                                             368
 Abolition of Calps,                                                    368
 Size of townships,                                                     369
 Occupation of townships,                                               370
 Average size of township in Central Highlands,                         370
 Township in the Islands,                                               371
 Highland deer-forests,                                                 371
 Causes affecting the population in the eighteenth century,             372
 Townships in the Inner Hebrides in 1850,                               374
 Existing townships in the Outer Hebrides,                              378

                                 APPENDIX.

                                     I.
 Translation of a part of the Book of Clanranald, containing the
   Legendary History of the Lords of the Isles as given by the
   MacVurichs, hereditary Sennachies of the Clan,                       397

                                    II.
 Baile Suthain Sith Eamhna, an Irish poem relating to the kingdom of
   the Isles, with a translation by W. M. Hennessy, Esq.,               410

                                    III.
 The Description of the Isles of Scotland, written 1577-1595,           428

                                    IV.
 On the Authenticity of the Letters Patent said to have been granted
   by King William the Lion to the Earl of Mar in 1171,                 441

                                     V.
 On the Earldom of Caithness,                                           448

                                    VI.
 Original of the Poem on the Lennox,                                    454

                                    VII.
 Comparison between the Highland Clans and the Afghaun Tribes.
   Written in 1816 by Sir Walter Scott,                                 456

                                   VIII.
 Legendary Descent of the Highland Clans, according to Irish MSS.,      458

 INDEX,                                                                 493

                             ILLUSTRATIVE MAP.

 Scotland, with the ancient divisions of the land,             _to face the
                                                                     Title_




                               BOOK III.

                           _LAND AND PEOPLE_.

                             ——————●——————




                               CHAPTER I.

             SCOTLAND IN THE REIGN OF ALEXANDER THE THIRD.


[Sidenote: Consolidation of the provinces of Scotland into one feudal
           monarchy completed in this reign.]

The brightest and most prosperous period in the annals of Scotland was
undoubtedly that during which she was under the rule of the dynasty of
kings which sprang from the union of the Celtic king Malcolm Ceannmor
with the Saxon princess Margaret. It was during this period of upwards
of a century and a half that the different provinces of Scotland were
welded into one feudal monarchy, and the various races which inhabited
them, and upon the allegiance of each of whom the kings of this race had
hereditary claims, were fused into one mixed population combining the
peculiar qualities of each.

The reign of Alexander the Third, the last king of this old Celtic
dynasty of Scottish kings, saw the concentration of the various
provinces of Scotland into one compact kingdom finally completed by the
cession of the Isles in the year 1266. Scotland now presented the same
geographical platform which it ever after possessed. The various races
which composed its population occupied in the main the same relative
position. The kingdom of Scotland could now be no longer viewed as a
limited Gaelic kingdom, possessing dependencies peopled by British,
Anglic, or Scandinavian communities, but had become a feudal monarchy,
the dominant element of which was Teutonic, while the Celtic population
was either restricted to the wilder and more mountain regions, or formed
the under class of serfs and tillers of the soil.

It would seem as if the task of amalgamating the discordant elements of
the population, and of concentrating the semi-independent provinces
which they peopled, had no sooner been completed than the dynasty which
effected it was to pass away, and a war of succession was to follow,
which was still further to root up her ancient institutions, and to
throw the kingdom still more into the hands of kings and nobility of an
alien race.

By the death of his only daughter, who had been married to the king of
Norway, and of his only son in the same year, Alexander the Third found
that unless he had a male heir by a second marriage the succession to
the throne would devolve upon a little grand-daughter, the Princess of
Norway, then only two years old, and on her the succession was settled
in a Parliament held at Scone on the 5th February 1283-4, failing such
male issue. In the instrument by which the succession was so settled the
magnates of Scotland bound themselves to receive Margaret, daughter of
Eric, king of Norway, and of Margaret, daughter of King Alexander, as
their lady and heir of the kingdom of Scotia; and to acknowledge her and
her heirs as their liege lady, and the true heir of their sovereign in
the whole kingdom, and in the island of Man, and all the other islands
pertaining to the kingdom of Scotia, as well as in Tynedale and Penrith,
and other dependencies of the kingdom.[1]

Such were the enlarged limits to which the name of Scotia, once confined
to the districts between the Firth of Forth and the river Spey, had now
extended; and the dependencies of the kingdom, which had then embraced
large semi-independent provinces on the south and west of these
boundaries, were now reduced to the recently-acquired Western Isles, and
to the small districts of Tynedale and Penrith lying beyond her southern
frontier.

If this process of consolidation, however, may be said to have been
completed in the reign of Alexander the Third, it can only be held to
have properly commenced with that of David the First. Prior to his
accession, although the rule of the Scottish monarchs had extended
itself by degrees over the districts south of the Forth and Clyde, and
then west of the Drumalban range and the river Spey, yet the name of
Scotia was still confined to the eastern districts between these limits.
These districts formed the real nucleus and heart of the kingdom, and
were more directly associated with her monarchs as kings of the Scots.

[Sidenote: Southern frontier of Scotland.]

The extension of their power over the southern districts commenced about
a century after the establishment of the Scottish dynasty on the Pictish
throne, when, in the year 946, the districts forming the kingdom of
Cumbria were ceded by Edward the elder to Malcolm king of the Scots.
This kingdom extended, at that time, from the river Clyde to the river
Derwent in Cumberland, and to the cross at Stanmore on the borders of
Westmoreland and Yorkshire, which separated it from the Northumbrian
territories. It embraced the western districts of Scotland from the
Clyde to the Solway, the present county of Cumberland, with the
exception of that part of it which lies on the south of the river
Derwent and formed the barony of Copeland, and the whole of Westmoreland
exclusive of the barony of Kendal, which, with Copeland and the western
districts as far as the borders of Wales, belonged to the Northumbrian
kingdom.

Within eighty years afterwards, the districts on the east coast
extending from the Forth to the Tweed, and consisting of Lothian and
Teviotdale, were ceded to his grandson, another Malcolm. These southern
territories were, however, in the position of dependencies on the
kingdom of Scotland, lying beyond her proper southern frontier and
within that of England, and were on three different occasions entirely
separated from the Scottish kingdom:—First during the usurpation of
Macbeth and the possession of the greater part of Scotland by the
Norwegian Earl of Orkney, whose joint rule certainly did not extend
beyond the Forth, while the southern districts remained faithful to the
family of Duncan; again during the short reign of Donald Ban; and for a
third time after the death of Eadgar, when the territories over which he
had ruled as king were divided between his brothers Alexander and David,
the former reigning as king over the kingdom north of the Forth and
Clyde, while the latter ruled with the title of Earl over these southern
dependencies. The southern frontier of the Cumbrian kingdom did not, at
this time, extend beyond the Solway, for the Norman king, William Rufus,
had, in the year 1092, wrested that part of it which lay between the
Solway and the Derwent from Malcolm Ceannmor, and given it to the Norman
baron Ranulph de Meschines, while Henry I. erected it, with
Westmoreland, in 1132, into the bishopric of Carlisle. The southern
boundary of Earl David’s possessions had thus become coincident with the
southern frontier of the later kingdom of Scotland. It was only on the
accession of David to the throne of Scotland that they became
permanently united to the kingdom, and the name of Cumbria, or
Cumberland, was restricted to that part of the ancient kingdom of
Cumbria which now belonged to England. The connection of the royal
family with the ancient line of the Saxon kings, the training and Norman
tendencies of David himself, and his marriage with the daughter of an
Earl of Northumbria, and widow of an Earl of Northampton, whose mother
was a niece of the Conqueror, created a tie between them and the Anglic
population of the southern districts which was closer than that which
now connected him with the Celtic population of the other portions of
the kingdom; and Lothian assumed that prominent position as the most
valuable and cherished centre of the interests of the monarchy, which
had hitherto belonged to the region between the Forth and the Spey.

[Sidenote: English possessions of the Scottish kings.]

But while David the First may be held to have established the Solway,
the range of the Cheviots, and the Tweed, as the proper southern
boundary of the kingdom of Scotland, his marriage gave him claims to
territories beyond it, which he was disposed to assert when opportunity
offered. During the life of Matilda, his queen, he had enjoyed in her
right the earldoms of Northampton and Huntingdon; but on her death,
seven years after he had succeeded to the throne of Scotland, the
earldom of Northampton passed to her son by her first marriage, Simon de
Senlis, while Henry, her son by King David, succeeded to the earldom of
Huntingdon. The death of Henry, king of England, in 1135, and the
disputed succession between his daughter the empress of Germany and his
sister’s son Stephen, Earl of Mortaigne, presented the opportunity King
David longed for. He embraced the cause of the empress, who was his
niece, and in her name took possession of Northumberland, with the
exception of the castle of Bamborough, which he soon after surrendered
to Stephen, who confirmed the Honor of Huntingdon to Prince Henry, with
Doncaster and the castle of Carlisle in addition to it. In the following
year King David again claimed the northern provinces in name of his son
Prince Henry, and both Northumberland and Cumberland were yielded to
him; but on peace being made between him and Stephen he surrendered
Northumberland, retaining, however, Cumberland in England. An attempt,
two years afterwards, to regain Northumberland led to the battle of the
Standard, in which David was defeated; but a peace was concluded in
1139, when Northumberland was made over to Prince Henry, except the
fortresses of Newcastle and Bamborough, which he retained to his death
in 1152, when King David had Malcolm, the eldest son of Prince Henry,
proclaimed heir to the crown, and presented his second son, William, to
the Northumbrian barons as their ruler. Malcolm had not been four years
on the throne when he surrendered Northumberland and Cumberland to the
king of England, which were annexed to the English crown, while the king
restored to him the Honor of Huntingdon. An attempt on the part of his
brother and successor, William the Lion, to regain these provinces, led
to the war in which he was defeated and taken prisoner in 1173, and
Huntingdon was taken from him and given to Simon de Senlis; but on the
death of the latter in 1184 it was restored to King William, who
bestowed it upon his youngest brother David, afterwards known as David,
Earl of Huntingdon, in whose family it remained.[2] The claims of the
Scottish kings upon the northern provinces of England were renewed by
Alexander the Second, but through the mediation of Cardinal Otho, the
Pope’s legate, all questions in dispute between England and Scotland
were finally settled by an agreement concluded at York in September
1237. In lieu of the claims made by Alexander upon the earldoms of
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmoreland, as his hereditary right,
and for the dowry he ought to have received with Johanna, the sister of
the king of England, whom he had married, King Henry undertook to convey
to the King of Scotland in property, lands in the earldoms of
Northumberland and Cumberland to the yearly value of two hundred
pounds.[3] The lands so settled upon him were Tynedale, also called the
barony of Werk, in Northumberland, and the crown demesne in Cumberland,
consisting of Penrith and other lands, with the exception of the castle
of Carlisle.

Such is a short sketch of the attempts made by the kings of Scotland to
extend their frontiers to the south; and the result was that in the
reign of Alexander the Third the southern boundary of Scotland was the
same as it is at present, but Alexander was left in possession of the
lands of Tynedale and Penrith beyond it, as a dependency of the kingdom,
and they remained with his successor John Baliol, when they were finally
lost to Scotland in the war of independence which followed his short and
disastrous reign.

[Sidenote: Northern boundary of Scotland.]

But if the kings of this dynasty struggled vainly to enlarge their
boundaries on the south, they were more successful in gradually
extending the power of the crown over the northern and western
provinces. David I. by successfully defeating and crushing the rebellion
of Angus, Earl of Moray, in 1130, terminated the semi-independent state
of that province, and no earl of this province was permitted to exist
till King Robert Bruce bestowed it upon his nephew Randolph, but its
guardianship was committed to different Scottish nobles, under the title
of _Custos Moraviæ_.[4] The son of Malcolm MacHeth, who called himself
the son of Earl Angus, attempted on the accession of Malcolm IV. to
regain the province with the aid of the powerful Regulus of Argyll, but
unsuccessfully, and their failure was followed by the northern seaboard,
between Inverness and the Spey, where David I. had already planted the
royal castle, being to a great extent taken from the native chiefs and
given to strangers—a policy still further followed out by his successor
William the Lion, who added the district of Ross, in which he built two
castles; and the crown continued to maintain its control over these
provinces, notwithstanding occasional attempts on the part of the Celtic
inhabitants to regain their independence by supporting the pretensions
of the families of MacWilliam and MacHeth. The province of Caithness
too, which at this time included Sutherland, and had for generations
belonged to the Norwegian earls of Orkney, who held it nominally under
the king of Scotland with the title of Earl, was at length brought by
the same monarch more directly under the power of the crown, and placed
in the same position as the other Scottish provinces. By his son
Alexander the Second the still more extensive province of Argathelia or
Argyll, forming the western seaboard of Scotland, and extending from
Loch Long, opening off the Firth of Clyde, to the borders of Caithness,
was brought under subjection, so that in the reign of this king the
power of the crown was firmly established over the whole mainland of
Scotland north of the Firths of Forth and Clyde. The islands, however,
which surrounded it still belonged to the kingdom of Norway. The Orkney
and Shetland Islands had been colonised by the Norwegians as early as
the ninth century. They had been ruled by a line of Norwegian Jarls, who
owed submission to the king of Norway alone, and though the succession
to these Jarls opened in the reign of William the Lion to two families
of Scottish descent, they were still considered as Jarls under the
Norwegian crown, and the islands did not become connected with the
Scottish kingdom till long after the period we are dealing with. The
Western Isles, however, stood in a different position. Although the
Norwegian Vikings had to a great extent taken possession of them at the
same time that they colonised Orkney, and they had been the subject of
frequent contest between the Norwegian Jarl and the Danish kings of
Dublin, who had acquired possession of the island of Man, they were
still claimed by the Scottish kings as belonging to their kingdom, till
the reign of Edgar, when they were formally ceded to the king of Norway.
They were at this time along with the Isle of Man under the rule of
petty kings of Norwegian descent, and this line of Norwegian kings of
the Isles retained the whole till the year 1154, when the kingdom of the
Isles was divided, and the islands south of the Point of Ardnamurchan
passed under the rule of the Celtic ruler of Argyll, whose claim was
derived through a descent in the female line from one of the Norwegian
kings of the Isles, but who still held them nominally under the king of
Norway. The tie to Norway, however, was becoming weaker and the
connection with Scotland stronger, when the unsuccessful attempt of
Hakon, king of Norway, to firmly re-establish his power over the whole
of the islands in the reign of Alexander the Third, and his defeat and
death, led to the cession of Man and the Isles in the year 1266 to the
Scottish monarch. And in 1284 we find them settled upon the Maid of
Norway as a dependency of the Scottish kingdom. The Western Islands
became from this time firmly united to the rest of Scotland, while the
island of Man, after being in the following century alternately in the
possession of the Scots and the English, finally passed over to the
English crown.

[Sidenote: Physical aspect of Scotland in the reign of Alexander the
           Third.]

Such then was, in extent, the Scotland of Alexander the Third, and of
its physical aspect at this time we can also form a very fair
conception. As early as the third century we are told that the Barbarian
tribes beyond the bounds of the Roman province in Britain ‘inhabit
mountains wild and waterless, and plains desert and marshy, having
neither walls nor cities, nor tillage, but living by pasturage, the
chase, and certain berries;’ and that ‘many parts being constantly
flooded by the tides of the ocean become marshy.’[5] Had the writer of
this description ever seen the Scotch mountains, probably ‘waterless’ is
the very last epithet he would have thought of applying to them; and
though the inhabitants are said to have had neither walls nor cities,
yet no doubt every rock and height showed the rude fortification or hill
fort, the remains of so many of which are still seen, and every rising
ground, with its rude collection of huts, would be surrounded with its
rampart of earth and stones. Adamnan, writing in the seventh century,
tells us of the fortified residence of the king of the Picts on the
banks of the river Ness, with its royal house and gates, of a village on
the banks of a lake, and of the houses of the country people. Of the
leading physical features of the country he tells us too, of the large
inland lakes, Loch Ness and Loch Awe, and of the range of mountains
forming the backbone of Britain, or great watershed dividing the eastern
and western waters, and separating the Scots from the Picts;[6] and
Bede, in the succeeding century, talks of the mountains which separated
the southern from the northern Picts, and within which the former had
seats.[7]

To some extent these features must have still characterised the Scotland
of Alexander the Third. The aspect of the country became gradually
altered by the hand of man as he advanced in civilisation. The
introduction of Christianity, and its rapid spread over the country,
would fill it with those rude Celtic monasteries which were everywhere
established, and with small Christian colonies, who practised a rude
agriculture; forests would be cut down and mosses drained; and in place
of ‘those marshy parts of the country, constantly flooded by the tides
of ocean,’ would appear those rich carses which border the estuaries of
her great rivers. The climate would become ameliorated, towns and
villages would spring up, and a more settled mode of life become
established among the Celtic tribes which formed her population. An old
description of Scotland north of the Firths, written in the first year
of the reign of William the Lion, exhibits of course the same great
physical landmarks, which do not alter, as still forming the leading
territorial boundaries. ‘This region is said to exhibit the form and
figure of a man. The chief part of the figure, that is, the head, is in
Arregaithel, or Argyll, in the west part of Scotland, on the Irish Sea.
His feet are upon the German Ocean. The mountains and deserts of
Arregaithel form his head and neck, and his body is the range of
mountains called Mound, or the Mounth, which extends from the western to
the eastern sea. His arms are the mountains which separate Scotia from
Arregaithel. His right side is formed from Moray, Ross, Marr, and
Buchan. His legs are these two great and principal rivers the Tay and
the Spey. Between the legs are Angus and Mearns, on this side of the
Mounth, and other districts on the other side,’ that is, Marr and
Buchan, ‘between the Spey and the Mounth.’[8] This description, which is
fanciful enough, would place the head of the supposed figure at Ben
Nevis, the highest mountain in Scotland. The body is formed by the great
range of hills which separated Inverness-shire and Aberdeenshire from
the counties of Perth, Forfar, and Kincardine, and which forms, as it
were, the backbone of the Grampians, and these are the mountains
obviously alluded to by Bede as separating the northern from the
southern Picts. The arms are formed by the range of hills which run at
right angles, and are the great watershed dividing the eastern and
western waters. The southern part forming the left arm now separates
Argyllshire from Perthshire, and the northern part, or right arm,
divides the western seaboard of Inverness-shire and Ross-shire, which
then formed part of Argyllshire, from the eastern districts of these
counties, and these are equally plainly the Drumalban range, which in
Adamnan’s time divided the Scots from the Picts.

Upon this scene, during the period when Scotland was under the rule of
this dynasty, two great additional features were introduced. The first
consisted of those Norman castles or strongholds, either built by the
Norman barons to whom grants of land had been made, and which
contributed so greatly to their power in the country, or by the kings of
this race upon the crown lands; and around the latter would cluster
those groups of dwellings, inhabited by traders and artisans, which, on
the banks or at the mouths of navigable rivers, formed the burghs and
seaport towns in which the trade and commerce of the country was carried
on. The second great feature consisted of those monasteries founded by
these kings for communities of regular canons or other monastic orders
of the Roman Catholic Church, which, with their stone-and-lime
buildings, the extensive tracts of land attached to them, and the
industrial habits they fostered, would tend greatly to extend the
cultivation of the soil, and to promote the social condition of the
people under their influence.

We have a somewhat imperfect description of Scotland as it was in the
time of Alexander the Third, compiled not long after his death. It
commences at the eastern border between England and Scotland, and first
names Tyvidale, that is, Teviotdale, with its two royal castles of
Rokesborow or Roxburgh, and Geddeworth or Jedburgh, the latter a
favourite residence of Alexander the Third. Then follows Lothian, with
its castles of Berwick, Edinburgh, Dunbar, and Strivelyn or Stirling.
These two provinces extend, it tells us, from the border to Erlesferie
and Queneferie, that is, to the Firth of Forth. In the districts which
extend in the west from the Clyde to the Solway it names only the new
castle built upon the Ayr water, and in Galewey, Anandale the land of
the Lord Robert de Brus, the royal castle of Dounfres or Dumfries, that
of Kirkcudbright, belonging to William de Ferrers, and the castle of
Baleswynton, belonging to John de Cumyn. The central districts are not
named, but here was the extensive forest of Ettrick and Traquair
separating the eastern from the western districts. Beyond Lothian, it
tells us, lay the land of Fif or Fife, in which were the burgh of St.
Andrews and the castle of Locres or Leuchars. Beyond the Firth of Tay
was the land of Anegos or Angus, in which were the castles of Dundee and
Forfar; and then follows ‘a certain waste called the Mounth, upwards of
sixty miles long and sixteen broad, across which a most wretched passage
can be taken to the north, without food’ (ubi est pessimum passagium
sine cibo). Then follows Mar, and Bouwan or Buchan, in which is the
burgh of Aberdene with its royal castle. Followed by the land of Morref
or Moray, with the castles of Elgyn and Spiny, and then Ross and
Cateneys or Caithness.[9]

This description seems to follow the coast, as the central districts of
Gowry, Atholl, Stratherne, and Menteath are omitted, as well as the
district of Arregaithel or Argyll, and the enumeration of the castles is
very imperfect. Fordun, however, gives a view of Scotland in his day
which is probably equally applicable to the time of Alexander the Third,
and in which he seems to break out into enthusiastic admiration of his
native country. ‘It is a country,’ he says, ‘strong by nature, and
difficult and toilsome of access. In some parts it towers into
mountains; in others it sinks down into plains. For lofty mountains
stretch through the midst of it from end to end, as do the tall Alps
through Europe, and these mountains formerly separated the Scots from
the Picts, and their kingdoms from each other,’—a very accurate
description of the Drumalban chain, extending through Scotland from
south to north. ‘Impassable as they are on horseback, save in very few
places,’ he proceeds, alluding here to the passes into Argyll, ‘they can
hardly be crossed even on foot, both on account of the snow always lying
on them, except in summer-time only, and by reason of the boulders torn
off the beetling crags, and the deep hollows in their midst. Along the
foot of these mountains are vast woods, full of stags, roe-deer, and
other wild animals and beasts of various kinds.... Numberless springs
also well up, and burst forth from the hills and the sloping ridges of
the mountains, and trickling down with sweetest sound in crystal
rivulets between flowery banks, flow together through the level vales,
and give birth to many streams; and these again to large rivers, in
which Scotia marvellously abounds beyond any other country; and at their
mouths, where they rejoin the sea, she has noble and secure harbours.
Scotia also has tracts of land bordering on the sea, pretty level and
rich, with green meadows, and fertile and productive fields of corn and
barley, and well adapted for growing beans, peas, and all other produce;
destitute, however, of wine and oil though by no means so, of honey and
wax. But in the upland districts, and along the highlands, the fields
are less productive, except only in oats and barley. The country is
there very hideous, interspersed with moors and marshy fields, muddy and
dirty. It is, however, full of pasturage grass for cattle, and comely
with verdure in the glens along the watercourses. This region abounds in
wool-bearing sheep, and in horses; and its soil is grassy, feeds cattle
and wild beasts, is rich in milk and wool, and manifold in its wealth of
fish in sea, river, and lake.’[10]

We can thus, in some degree, picture to ourselves the Scotland of this
period. Instead of the large tracts of cultivated land and the modern
mansions of its possessors surrounded by plantations, we should see
forests of trees of native growth, from amid which, or on their margin,
would rise the towers of the royal castles, or those of the Norman
barons. We should see small patches of cultivated land, interspersed
with long stretches of barren heath. In sheltered valleys we should find
the seats of the early bishoprics of the Celtic Church, and the more
imposing monasteries of the regular clergy and monastic orders
subsequently introduced, surrounded by a greater extent of cultivated
land, and with the huts of the occupiers of the soil clustering round.
On the banks of the navigable rivers, or at their mouth, we should find
settlements of the trading and industrial population protected by rude
walls; and we should find the northern and western districts exhibiting
very much the same characteristics as they did during the succeeding
centuries:—the two great leading mountain chains of the Mounth and
Drumalban forming a succession of hunting-grounds or forests, left to
the red-deer and other game; the minor chains leading from them to the
south-east and north-east terminating abruptly on the lowland plains,
and forming a great mountain barrier, extending on the south in an
oblique line from Ben Lomond to the great range of the Mounth near
Stonehaven, and on the north from the same range at Ballater to the
river Nairn, through which the great rivers rising among the western
hills pour their waters, through narrow gorges which form the passes
into the mountain region. Within this line the country would be mainly
used for pasturage, and its natural defences would render but few
artificial fortifications necessary.

[Sidenote: Population of Scotland in the reign of Alexander the Third
           composed of six races.]

During the period when the boundaries of Scotland had been thus extended
by the kings of this dynasty, its population was composed of several
distinct races, partly of Teutonic and partly of Celtic origin, forming
a people of very mixed descent, in which the Teutonic element was
gradually predominating more and more over the Celtic, and either
absorbing the latter or confining it to the more barren and mountain
regions of the country. The constituent elements of this population bore
six different names. These were the Picts and the Cumbrians or Britons,
the Scots and Angles, the Norwegians, and the Franks or Normans, and we
find them distinguished by these names under the rule of the Scoto-Saxon
monarchs, till they gradually become merged in the general name of
Scots. Thus the charters of Eadgar and Alexander the First are addressed
to their subjects, both Scots and Angles. Those by David the First and
Malcolm the Fourth sometimes to Scots and Angles, at other times to
Franks or Normans and Angles, and frequently to Franks and Angles, Scots
and Galwegians or Picts, while in the charters of the subsequent kings
these distinctions disappear. When the whole force of the kingdom was
called out by David the First at the invasion of England which
terminated in the disastrous battle of the Standard, we find that his
army, according to Richard of Hexham, was composed of Normans, Germans,
Angles, Northumbrians and Cumbrians of Teviotdale, of Lothian, of Picts
commonly called Galwegians, and of Scots,[11] while, according to
Ailred, the army was arranged in the following battalions. The first was
composed of the Galuenses or Galwegian Picts; the second of the
Cumberenses and Teviotdalenses or Britons of Strathclyde and Teviotdale;
the third of the Laodonenses, Insulani, and Lauernani, that is, a mixed
battalion of Angles of Lothian, Norwegians of the Isles, and the Gaelic
people of the Lennox; and the king had in his own battalion the Scotti
and Muravenses, that is, the people of Scotland between the Forth and
the Spey and of the great province of Moray, which he had recently
subjected, beyond it, and along with them ‘Milites Angli et Franci,’[12]
or Saxon and Norman barons.

[Sidenote: Indigenous races of the Britons and Picts.]

Of these races two only were indigenous, and the rest were intruders. To
the indigenous races belonged the Cumbrians or Britons south of the
Firths of Forth and Clyde, and the Picts, who originally inhabited the
whole country north of these estuaries, as well as Galloway and a
considerable part of Ireland. Both belonged to the Celtic race, the
former to that branch of it, the dialect of which is represented by the
Welsh, Cornish, and Breton, and perhaps in the main most nearly
approached the Cornish in the form of their speech. But whether the
Picts were altogether a homogeneous people may perhaps be a question.
From the time when they first became known to the Romans, they appear
throughout as divided into two branches; but whether the expression of
the Roman historian, when he terms these two divisions of the Pictish
people two nations, indicates any diversity of race, or whether, as the
language of Bede rather implies, the distinction was simply
geographical, certainly in one important respect they for a time showed
a material difference, for the southern Picts adopted Christianity at a
much earlier period than the northern Picts, and they were so far
disunited that the conversion of the former did not imply that of the
whole nation, and for a century and a half, while the southern portion
were nominally Christian, the northern half remained Pagan. Every
circumstance, however, connected with them, tends to show that the Picts
who inhabited the northern and western regions of Scotland, as well as
Galloway and the districts in Ireland, belonged to the Gaelic race and
spoke a Gaelic dialect, while the southern Picts, placed between them
and a British people, present features which appear to assimilate them
to both; and the conclusion we came to was that they were probably
originally of the same Gaelic race, while a British element had entered
into their language, either from mixture with that people, or from some
other influence arising from their contact.

[Sidenote: Colonising races of Scots and Angles.]

The sixth century brought in both an additional Gaelic and a Teutonic
element into the population of this part of Britain, for in the
beginning of that century a colony of Scots from Ireland, who were
undoubtedly a Gaelic people, settled on the barren coasts on the north
side of the Firth of Clyde, and the same century saw the eastern
seaboard, extending from the Tweed to the Firth of Forth, in possession
of the Angles of Northumberland; while there is reason to believe that
some parts of the country between these limits had been previously
partially settled by Frisian tribes belonging to the great Saxon
confederation.

[Sidenote: Intruding races of Danes, Norwegians, and Normans.]

In the ninth century the great outburst of piratical adventurers from
the Scandinavian shores brought first the Danes and afterwards the
Norwegians to Scotland, and the latter not only colonised the Orkney and
Shetland Islands but became masters of the Western Isles, and from time
to time of considerable districts on the mainland of Scotland. During
the reigns of the earlier kings of this dynasty the Saxon influence was
largely increased by those who either took refuge in Scotland from the
power of the Norman Conqueror or were attracted by the connection of
these kings through their mother with the Saxon royal family; while
David the First introduced the Norman barons, who obtained large tracts
of land on both sides of the Firths of Forth and Clyde under his
auspices and that of his immediate successors.

[Sidenote: Influence of foreign races on native population.]

In estimating the extent to which these foreign elements influenced the
original inhabitants, and how far they formed a permanent ingredient in
the mixed population, it is necessary to keep in view the circumstances
under which they obtained a footing in the country, and the peculiar
features which characterised the intruders. Did they enter the country
as colonists or as conquerors? If the former, did they come as military
colonists? or did they bring their wives and families with them? Or, if
the latter, did they amalgamate with the conquered population so as to
form one people, the language and institutions of one or other obtaining
the mastery over the whole? or did they exterminate or drive them out?
or were the remains of the conquered people retained as a servile class
under the conquerors? The first recorded settlements which have a
historical basis were those of the Scots on the west coast and of the
Angles on the east. Of these the Scots appear to have come more as
colonists than as invaders. They were a tribe of Scots who came from the
district of Dalriada in Ireland in the beginning of the sixth century,
and brought that name with them which was applied to the southern part
of the great western district of Argyll. They belonged to the same
Gaelic race as the Pictish tribes among whom they were settled, and the
oldest tradition as reported by Bede cannot tell whether ‘they secured
to themselves these settlements by fair means or by force of arms.’[13]
The conversion of the northern Picts to Christianity by the Irish
missionary St. Columba, and the establishment of a Christian church
among them under Scottish clergy, now formed a bond of union between
them; and it is recorded by Bede that up to the time when he wrote his
History their mutual boundaries had remained unaltered. In the same
century the Angles of Bernicia, under the sons of Ida, who had founded
that kingdom, obtained possession of the districts extending along the
east coast as far as the Firth of Forth. They were a Pagan people,
conquering a Christian population of a different race and language from
themselves; and there seems little reason to question that this
settlement was only effected after a fierce and prolonged struggle
between the Angles and the native population, by which, after varied
fortunes on either side, the latter were eventually either exterminated
or driven into the more hilly and barren regions on the west. There were
thus formed four distinct kingdoms, which remained independent of each
other during the sixth, seventh, and eighth centuries, viz. those of the
Picts and of the Cumbrian Britons consisting of the two indigenous
races, and those of the Scots of Dalriada and Angles of Bernicia
established by two of the intruding peoples; and their mutual boundaries
had remained unaltered down to the period when Bede wrote in the eighth
century.

[Sidenote: Foreign elements introduced into population of Pictish and
           Cumbrian territories.]

It was not till the ninth century that those changes in their relative
position commenced which ultimately led to their fusion into one mixed
population. A revolution in that century led to a dynasty of kings of
Scottish descent being permanently placed on the Pictish throne, and to
a Scottish element being largely and to an increasing extent introduced
into the Pictish population. The capital of the Pictish kingdom had at
this time been Scone, and around this central point the new Scottish
monarchy had its chief influence, and in the neighbouring districts the
new Scottish population would be most numerous. The province of Fife
seems to have been considered as their main seat, and they appear to
have spread over the central districts of the region extending from the
Forth to the great barrier of the Mounth, while the more independent
portion of its Pictish population appear at its two extremities in the
_firu Fortren_ or men of Fortren, who had their chief stronghold in
Dundurn at the eastern end of Lochearn, and in the _viri de Moerne_ or
men of Mearns, whose principal fortress was _Dunfother_ or Dunnottar at
Stonehaven. These Scots and Picts, belonging to the same Gaelic race and
speaking kindred dialects, would amalgamate readily enough, and they
would probably be found at this time established alongside of each other
in homesteads some of which would be Scottish and others Pictish,—a
state of matters of which we find examples in northern Russia, where the
earlier Finnish population and the intruding Slavs occupy respective
villages, and in parts of Greece, where the distribution of the Albanian
and the Greek population presents the same features. This view of the
distribution of the Scottish and Pictish communities in the new kingdom
of Alban, to which the name of Scotia was soon applied, will to some
extent account for the strange interlacing in this part of the country
of the three earliest dioceses of Dunkeld, of Abernethy, afterwards
represented by the dioceses of Dunblane and Brechin, and of St.
Andrews,—the two former being traditionally connected with the Pictish
name, and the latter closely identified with the Scottish people.
Diocesan boundaries are usually found to reflect more ancient ethnic
divisions.

The Scottish dynasty of kings had not occupied the Pictish throne for
more than sixty or seventy years when the failure of the line of British
kings of the Strathclyde Britons, and the election of a brother of the
Scottish king to be their successor, placed a similar dynasty of
Scottish kings on the throne of the Cumbrian kingdom, and made its
eventual cession to the Scottish monarch a more natural and easy
arrangement; and the cession of Lothian in the following century
completed the territorial formation of the later Scottish kingdom.

[Sidenote: Spread of Teutonic people over them.]

Such being the state of matters when the dynasty of kings sprung from
the union of Malcolm Ceannmor with the Saxon Princess Margaret ruled
over this kingdom, we find when we reach the reign of Alexander the
Third that a great change has taken place. The British speech has
entirely disappeared from the district forming the ancient Strathclyde
kingdom, and their population now speak the same Northumbrian or
northern dialect of English with the people of Lothian; while this
Teutonic language has likewise spread over the eastern districts
extending from the Forth to the Moray Firth, where in the reign of
Malcolm Ceannmor that Celtic king had had to interpret the Saxon speech
of his queen to its inhabitants, and the indigenous Gaelic vernacular
was now confined to the mountain regions of the North and West north of
the Firths of Forth and Clyde, while the people of Lennox and Galloway,
within the limits of the ancient Cumbrian kingdom, likewise retained
their Gaelic speech. There had, therefore, taken place in these
districts a silent revolution, of which history has taken little note.

Besides the violent or organic changes produced in a population by the
invasion or colonisation of a foreign people which history marks, and
the effects of which we can trace in the events recorded in the annals
of the country, there is another silent and inorganic spread of one race
over the territory of another, the eventual results of which are
apparent enough, and the causes which led to it may be divined, but the
steps of its progress are less easily marked. In the one, whole nations
or tribes take possession of part or the whole of new districts; in the
other, they spread not collectively but in families or groups. In the
one, the inroad is effected by force or by direct convention. In the
other, it is the result of natural causes arising from the contact of
two races possessing different qualities and states of civilisation, and
from the influence which the force of character of one people may
exercise over another. Their influence, too, upon the spoken language
and the place-names of the people presents itself in different aspects.
In the one, the language of the invading people is established as the
language of the country when the subject population has been
exterminated or driven out, and the older place-names are either adopted
into the language or changed at once. In the other, the silent and
gradual inorganic colonisation changes by degrees the spoken language,
but not the bulk of the place-names. The great natural features of the
country usually retain the names imposed upon them by its original
inhabitants, but those of the homesteads occupied by the colonising race
assume the forms of their language, and those applicable to the
dwellings of man only remain unchanged when the original people have
lingered longer, or when the name is expressive of some common natural
feature, which has been readily adopted as such by the intruders.
Topography thus affords us some help in indicating the presence of the
stranger, and marking the extent to which the race to which he belongs
has spread over the country.

When Earl David, as Prince of Cumbria, proposed to restore the ancient
church of Glasgow, and asked the elders and wise men of Cumbria to
inquire into the ancient possessions of that church, they told him that
after Kentigern, the founder of the church, and several of his
successors, had passed to God, ‘various seditions and insurrections
rising all around not only destroyed the church and its possessions,
but, laying waste the whole country, delivered its inhabitants into
exile. Thus, also, all good being exterminated, after a considerable
interval of time different tribes of different nationalities pouring in
from different parts inhabited this deserted country, but being of
separate race, speaking a dissimilar language, and living after
different fashion, not easily agreeing among themselves, they maintained
paganism rather than the cultivation of the faith. The Lord, however,
who wills that none should perish, was pleased to visit, in his
clemency, these unhappy inhabitants of a condemned habitation,
irrationally dwelling after the manner of beasts. In the days of Henry,
king of England, Alexander reigning as king in Scotia, God sent them
David, brother-german of the foresaid king, as prince and leader, who
corrected their obscene and wicked contagion, and bridled their
contumelious contumacy with nobleness of soul and inflexible
severity.’[14] This picture, coloured no doubt to deepen the shade of
the past, and to brighten the prospects of the country under David’s
rule, still sufficiently indicates the belief that the British
inhabitants had to a great extent deserted the country, and that it had
been repeatedly laid waste by foreign nations, who had eventually
settled in the country. The allusion to the paganism of some refers
probably to the Norwegians and Danes, the former of whom in 870 besieged
their capital Alclyde, now Dumbarton, and destroyed it after a few
months’ siege, and carried a great host of prisoners with them to
Ireland into captivity, and five years afterwards the Britons of
Strathclyde and Picts of Galloway were ravaged by the Danes of
Northumberland. A Welsh chronicle, attributed to Caradoc of Llancarvan,
tells us that in ‘891 the men of Strathclyde, who would not unite with
the Saxons, were obliged to leave their country, and go to Gwynedd or
North Wales.’[15] In 945 it was ravaged by Edmund, king of Wessex, and
ceded to the Scots. In 1000, Ethelred, king of Wessex, entered Cumbria,
ravaged it nearly all, and it was again laid waste; and in 1070,
Gospatric, Earl of Northumbria, having collected a considerable force,
made a furious incursion into the Cumbrian kingdom, then under the
dominion of the Scottish king Malcolm, spreading slaughter and
conflagration on all sides. These notices sufficiently bear out that
feature in the dark picture of the past history of the British kingdom,
and we may well believe that under these repeated devastations, and
under the Scottish dominion, its Welsh population, isolated in the north
between Picts, Scots, and Angles, and harassed by incessant invasions,
would gradually retreat to their mother country of Wales, and that their
neighbours would gradually settle in the partially deserted country.

There are some indications of earlier settlements among them of
Frisians, who left their name in Dunfres, the town of the Frisians, as
Dunbreatan or Dumbarton is the town of the Britons,[16] and the
subjection of the Cumbrian kingdom to the Angles of Northumbria for
thirty years prior to 685 must have had an effect on its population;
but, be this as it may, the neighbouring Anglic population, attracted by
her fertile plains and valleys, appear at a later period to have made
their way into the upper valley of the Tweed and Teviot, and along the
banks of the great watercourse of the Clyde, and to the plains of
Renfrew and Ayr, where they have left evidence of their settlements in
the numerous Saxon place-names ending with the generic terms of _ton_
and _hame_, while the northern district, where the limits of the
Cumbrian kingdom penetrated into the mountains—the district surrounding
the romantic lake of Loch Lomond—seems soon to have acquired a Gaelic
population, and became known as the Levenach or Lennox. The Gaelic
population of Galloway at the same time appear to have encroached upon
the southern limit of Ayrshire and peopled the district of Garrick with
a Gaelic race. Extensive territories too were granted by Earl David to
his Norman followers. The great district of Annandale was given to De
Bruce. The adjacent districts of Eskdale and Ewisdale were filled with
Normans. The De Morevilles obtained Cuninghame or the northern district
of Ayrshire, and the Norman Fitzallan, who became the Steward of
Scotland, acquired Strathgryff, or Renfrew and part of Kyle. These
Norman barons settled their Northumbrian followers on their lands, and
thus almost the whole of the ancient kingdom of the Cumbrian Britons
became soon entirely Saxonised.

A similar process seems to have commenced in the eastern districts north
of the Forth after the union of the Celtic monarch with the Saxon
princess had given the Saxon influence predominance in the country, and
stamped his children with the character and feeling of Saxon monarchs,
which soon produced a similar result. We find Saxon barons, who fled to
Scotland from the power of the Norman Conqueror, acquiring lands in the
province of Fife. The burghs founded by the kings of this race on the
crown lands were filled with Saxon and Flemish traders, and the latter
people obtained grants of land. Thus we find Malcolm the Fourth granting
the lands of Innes ‘Beroaldo Flandrensi,’ and David, Earl of Huntingdon,
grants lands in Garrioch to Malcolm, son of Bertolf, a Flemish name, and
his charter is addressed to ‘all good men of his kingdom, French or
Normans, English or Angles, Flemish and Scotch.’[17] The great religious
houses established by them brought southern ecclesiastics into the
northern parts of the kingdom, who were accompanied by a southern
following; and on the extensive church lands we find the sole remains of
the Celtic population appearing as serfs, under the Celtic appellations
of ‘Cumlawes’ and ‘Cumherbes,’[18] and large territories speedily passed
into the possession of Norman barons, who settled them with their own
followers.

In the scanty records which throw light upon the history of the land in
these districts, we can see the Gaelic name of the land-owners gradually
becoming more and more restricted, and retreating before the Teutonic
settlers. We can see more and more of the land becoming feudalised, and
being held by the followers of the barons in military tenure. The church
lands, forming a large proportion of the whole, became in fact
agricultural colonies of strangers. In the crown lands alone the older
land tenures maintained their position for a time, though there too the
increasing importance of the royal burghs, and the gradual advance of
their Saxon inmates into the surrounding land, soon carried the Saxon
tongue into them; and thus the old Celtic kingdom of Alban or Scotia,
extending from the Firth of Forth to the river Spey, had in the reign of
Alexander the Third assumed an entirely Teutonic aspect, while what
Fordun tells us of Malcolm the Fourth, that ‘having gathered together a
large army, the king removed the rebel nation of the Moravienses from
the land of their birth, as of old Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, had
dealt with the Jews, and scattered them throughout the other districts
of Scotland, both beyond the mountains,’ that is, the Mounth,‘and on
this side thereof, so that not even one native of that land abode there,
and installed therein his own peaceful people,’[19] is probably to some
extent true in so far as regards the inhabitants of the plain country
extending from the Spey along the southern shore of the Moray Firth to
the river Nairn, in which the royal castles of Elgin, Forres, and Nairn
were situated, and which formed the three small sheriffdoms of these
names. It is not at all unlikely that that king, or his successor
William the Lion, should have adopted the policy of interposing between
the native population, ‘who,’ Fordun tells us, ‘would, for neither
prayers nor bribes, neither treaties nor oaths, leave off their disloyal
ways, or their ravages among their fellow-countrymen,’ and the frontier
of the province a tract of country, garrisoned, as it were, with the
more settled people of the lowlands.

[Sidenote: Norwegian kingdom of the Isles.]

But if this silent and gradual immigration of the Teutonic people thus
took place into the southern and eastern districts of the country north
of the Forth and Clyde, and either absorbed its Celtic inhabitants or
gradually drove them back into the more mountainous regions, the latter
were exposed to a more direct assault from another people of Teutonic
race on the north and west, which, however, did not produce the same
permanent effect upon the population. This was that strange and sudden
appearance in the northern and western seas of a piratical horde of
sea-robbers, which issued from the Scandinavian countries lying to the
north of Germany. The first to make their appearance were the Danes, and
though they repeatedly ravaged the Western Isles and destroyed the
Christian monasteries, they effected permanent settlements only in
Ireland, and in the northern provinces of England forming the ancient
kingdom of Northumbria. They were followed by the Norwegians, who appear
to have been more attracted by the islands surrounding Scotland, and
thus came more immediately in contact with the Gaelic population of
Scotland. They entirely occupied the islands of Orkney and Shetland,
which they colonised; and took possession of the Western Isles, without,
however, driving out or absorbing the previous inhabitants of Gaelic
race.

By the Gaelic people these northern ravagers were termed either
_Geinnte_ or Gentiles as being pagans, or _Gall_ or Strangers as being
foreigners, and the two races of the Danes and Norwegians were
distinguished by the terms _Dubhgeinnte_ or _Dubhgall_, that is, black
pagans or black strangers, and _Finngeinnte_ or _Finngall_,[20] white
pagans or white strangers, and the Western Islands were termed
_Innsigall_, or the Islands of the Strangers, while the Norwegians
themselves called them the Sudreys or Southern Islands, to distinguish
them from the Nordereys or Northern Islands, that is, the Orkney and
Shetland Islands.[21]

[Sidenote: The Gallgaidheal.]

That the Norwegians did not so thoroughly colonise the Western Isles and
absorb its Gaelic population, as was the case with the Orkney and
Shetland Islands, may have arisen from their finding in the former a
more dense population, and also that they appear to have used the
Sudreys more as a kind of stepping-stone to other settlements, or as
temporary strongholds, rather than as places for lasting settlements,
and thus their Norwegian population was generally of a more transient
and fluctuating character;[22] but this was mainly true of the earlier
period of their occupation only, and a more important ground of
difference arose from the Gaelic population of the Western Isles more
nearly assimilating themselves to the character of the Norwegian
sea-robbers. They seem to have submitted easily to their rule, and to
have adopted their habits, so that when one of the great Norwegian
Vikings, Ketill Flatnose, succeeded in establishing a petty kingdom in
the Isles in opposition to the rapidly increasing power of Harald
Harfager, the first monarch who acquired the dominion of all Norway, we
find the Isles said by the Sagas to be in the possession of Scotch and
Irish Vikings, and Ketill appears in the Irish Annals under the name of
Caittil Finn as the leader of a people called the Gallgaidheal, a name
applied to those Gaidheal who became subject to the Norwegians, and
conformed to their mode of life. Harald, however, eventually conquered
both the Orkney Islands and the Sudreys or Western Isles. The former
came under the rule of a line of Norwegian Jarls, who, by the marriage
of one of them with the daughter of ‘Dungadr, Jarl of Katenes,’ that is,
of Duncan, the Celtic Mormaer of Caithness, added that province to their
dominions; and the Norwegian population seem to have as completely
colonised the eastern and level part of Caithness as they did the Orkney
Islands.

Harald appears to have governed the Western Isles by Norwegian Jarls,
but his hold upon them was slight, and apparently ceased with his death,
and they became merely the haunt of stray Vikings until the middle of
the following century, when their possession was contested between the
Danes of Dublin and Limerick, who had got a firm hold of the Island of
Man, and the Norwegian Jarls of Orkney. One of the principal leaders of
the Danes of Dublin, Anlaf Cuaran, had become connected with the
Scottish King Constantine, and appears to have exercised some authority
over the islands; but at the great battle of Brunanburgh, in which he
and his father-in-law Constantine were engaged, we find the death of
Geleachan, King of the Isles, recorded, as well as that of Cellach, a
prince or Mormaer of Scotland,[23] names which undoubtedly show a Gaelic
form. Soon after we find Maccus or Magnus, son of Aralt, a leader of the
Danes of Limerick, called King of Many Islands, and a struggle took
place between his brother and successor Godfred, son of Aralt, called
King of Innsigall, and Sigurd, Norwegian Jarl of Orkney, for the
possession of the western Isles, when the former was slain by the Gaelic
people of Dalriada or Argyll, and the Isles were acquired by the Orkney
Jarl, who soon after added to his territories the western and northern
districts of Scotland. His territories are said in the Sagas to have
consisted, besides Orkney and the Sudreys, of Katanes, Sudrland,
Myrhaevi or Moray, and Dali or the glens of Argyll, on the west, and we
find a Jarl Gilli apparently ruling the Isles, whose principal seat was
the island of Coll, and whose name has a Gaelic form.[24] He pays scatt
or tribute to Sigurd, and obtained his sister in marriage. Under
Sigurd’s son Thorfinn, the most powerful of the Orkney Jarls, after the
defeat and death of King Duncan in 1040, the whole of the northern
districts of Scotland, as far as the river Tay, fell under the power of
the Norwegians, who likewise possessed the Sudreys or Western Isles and
the Gaelic district of Galloway, while Macbeth, the Mormaer of Moray,
ruled as king over the dominions left to him, and the other districts
south of the Firths of Forth and Clyde adhered to the family of Duncan;
but on the death of Thorfinn, we are told that the additional
territories acquired by him fell back to their native lords. Malcolm,
the son and heir of Duncan, succeeded in defeating and killing the
usurper Macbeth, and his successor Lulach, also of the family of the
Mormaers of Moray, and establishing himself as king over the same
territories which had been possessed by his father. The Western Isles
pass for a time under the power of an Irish king of Leinster, which
shows how powerful the Gaelic element in their populations still was,
and on his death fell under the authority of the Crown. At this time the
Isle of Man was in the possession of the Danish kings of Dublin, but a
powerful Norwegian Viking who had joined the expedition of Harald, king
of Norway, in 1066, with his followers, and fought at the battle of
Stamford Bridge, succeeded after that defeat in driving the Danes out of
Man and extending his power over the Western Isles, where he founded a
new dynasty of Norwegian kings of the Isles. He is termed in the
Chronicle of Man Godred Crovan, and, in the Irish Annals, Goffraig
Meranach, king of the Galls of Dublin and the Isles, where his
death,[25] which, according to the Chronicle of Man, took place in the
island of Isla, is recorded in 1095. The Isles had, however, two years
before been invaded by Magnus, king of Norway, and brought under his
dominion, and were eventually formally ceded to him by King Eadgar in
the beginning of his reign, who thus, for a time, terminated their
nominal connection with the Scottish kingdom. After the death of King
Magnus, we find the leading men of the Isles applying to the king of
Ireland to send them some person of worth of the royal family to act as
their king till Olave, the son of Godred, should grow up, and Donald,
son of Tadg, was sent, who is said in the Annals of Innisfallen to have
acquired the kingdom of Innsigall by force,[26] but was driven out when
the king of Norway sent a Norwegian named Ingemund. But on his
attempting to have himself appointed king, he was attacked and slain by
the chief men of the Isles, and Olave, the son of Godred Crovan, was
established as king over all the Isles, and ruled them for forty years.
The Norwegians at this time still possessed the western seaboard of
Scotland north of the Firth of Clyde, and the district of Galloway.
According to the Red Book of Clanranald, ‘All the islands from Manann,
or the Isle of Man, to Arca, or the Orkneys, and all the bordering
country from Dun Bretan, or Dumbarton, to Cata, or Caithness, in the
north, were in the possession of the Lochlannach or Norwegians, and such
of the Gaedhal of those lands as remained were protecting themselves in
the woods and mountains.’[27]

This is probably a true picture of the relative position of the
Norwegian and the Gaelic population at this time, and is no doubt
equally applicable to the district of Galloway; but, during the rule of
Olave over the Isles, a simultaneous effort seems to have been made by
the Gaelic inhabitants of both districts to free this mainland border
country from the presence of the Norwegians. The leader of the native
Gaelic population of Argyll was Somerled, and of that of Galloway was
Fergus. The former bears certainly a Norwegian name, but the names of
father and grandfather have been preserved. He was son of Gillebride,
son of Gille-adomnan, and these names are of too purely a Gaelic form to
indicate anything but a Gaelic descent, and they are said in the Book of
Clanranald to have taken refuge from the Norwegians in Ireland, and to
have had a hereditary right to the mainland territories possessed by the
latter. The name of the father of Fergus of Galloway has not been
preserved, but his own name is a purely Gaelic form, and his personal
qualities probably raised him to the leadership of the Gaelic
population. Macvurich describes Gillebride, the father of Somerled, as
being present at a conference held by the Macmahons and Maguires in
Fermanagh, and obtaining help from them to regain his inheritance in
Scotland. He went over to Scotland with his son Somerled and a band of
followers, and when in the mountains and woods of Ardgour and Morvern,
they were surprised by a large force of Norwegians, who were, however,
eventually defeated by Somerled and his party; and, adds Macvurich, ‘he
did not halt in the pursuit until he drove them northward across the
river Sheil, and he did not cease from that work until he cleared the
western side of Alban from such of the Norwegians as had acquired the
dominion of the islands, with the exception of the island called
Innsigall, and he gained victory over his enemies in every field of
battle.’[28] We have no record of what took place in Galloway, except
that the result appears to have been the same, for we find the people of
Galloway joining the army of King David at the Battle of the Standard
under their Celtic leaders, and Fergus fully established in his reign as
Lord of Galloway. The Norwegians, however, were not allowed even to
retain quiet possession of the Isles, and Somerled, who now appears as
Regulus of Argyll, succeeded in eventually wresting the Southern Isles
from them. Macvurich tells us that after he had cleared the mainland of
the Norwegians ‘he spent some time in war, and another time in peace,’
and during one of these intervals peace appears to have been concluded
between the leaders of the Gaelic population and the Norwegian king
Olave, for the latter married Afreca, daughter of Fergus, the Celtic
lord of Galloway, by whom he had a son, Godred, and gave one of his own
daughters to Somerled, the Celtic Regulus of Argyll, in marriage, who
had by her four sons, Dubhgal, Reginald, Angus, and Olave.[29] During
the reign of Olave he is said by the Chronicle of Man to have ‘lived
upon such terms of union with all the kings of Ireland and Scotland that
no one dared to disturb the kingdom of the Isles as long as he was
alive;’ but after his death the two populations came again into
conflict, which resulted in the Gaelic population of Galloway
maintaining their independence, and those of Argyll adding a large
portion of the Islands to the dominions of their leader. Olave was slain
in the island of Man by the sons of his brother Harold, who had formed a
conspiracy against him in the year 1152, upon which, we are told in the
Chronicle of Man, the conspirators divided the land among themselves,
and a few days afterwards, having collected a fleet, they sailed over to
Galloway, intending to conquer it for themselves. The Galloway men,
however, formed themselves in a body and assailed them with great
impetuosity; whereupon they speedily fled in great confusion, and either
slew or expelled from it all the men of Galloway who were resident
within the island.’[30] In the following year Godred, the son of Olave,
arrived with some ships from Norway, and was elected by the chiefs of
the Isles as their king; but he was no sooner secure in his kingdom than
he became tyrannical to his chief men, some of whom he dispossessed, and
others he degraded from their dignities. One of the most powerful of
these, Thorfinn, son of Otter, went to Somerled and asked to have his
son Dubhgal, whose mother was King Olave’s daughter, that he might set
him on the throne of the Isles, and taking him through the Isles he
forced the chiefs to acknowledge him for their sovereign, and to give
hostages for their allegiance. Another of these chiefs called Paul fled
privately to Godred, who seems to have been in Man, and told him what
had taken place, when he immediately collected his followers, got his
ships ready, and sailed to meet the enemy. Somerled, too, collected a
fleet of eighty vessels, and a sea-battle was fought between Godred and
Somerled, during the night of the Epiphany, with great slaughter on both
sides, and next morning they came to a compromise, and divided the
sovereignty of the Isles, ‘so that from that period they have formed two
distinct monarchies till the present time.’[31]

Somerled was slain, as we know, at Renfrew in the year 1164, and on his
death his eldest son Dubhgal appears to have succeeded him in his
mainland territories, while his possessions in the Isles fell to his
second son Reginald with the Norwegian title of king. Godred died in the
Isle of Man in the year 1187, and was succeeded by his eldest son
Reginald. There thus came to be two Reginalds reigning over the Isles at
the same time, the Norwegian Reginald the son of Godred, and the Celtic
Reginald the son of Somerled. Both bore the title of King of the Isles,
and thus they are often confounded. There is preserved in the Book of
Fermoy a curious poem which throws some light on the state of the Isles
at this time.[32] It consists mainly of a panegyric on the Norwegian
Reginald, but appears to allude likewise to the other Reginald. When the
Isles were divided, those which lie south of the Point of Ardnamurchan
appear to have fallen to the share of Somerled, and his son Reginald
seems to have had his chief seat in the island of Isla. The Isles
retained by the Norwegians consisted of Skye, the Long Island, and the
islands of Tyree and Coll. The latter island of Coll, which we find was
the chief seat of the Jarls who had ruled the Isles under the king of
Norway prior to the establishment of the Norwegian kingdom of the Isles,
appears to have remained as the chief seat of the Norwegian Reginald,
for he is addressed in the poem as king of Coll. The islands of Arran
and Bute in the Firth of Clyde appear to have been shared between the
two Reginalds, the Norwegian retaining Arran, which forms a prominent
feature in the poem under the poetic name of _Eamain Abhlach_ or Eamania
of the apple-trees,[33] and Bute passing over to the Celtic Reginald.

It is unnecessary for our present purpose to follow the history of the
Western Isles further. Suffice it to say that Argyll came under the
power of the Crown in 1222, when Alexander the Second firmly established
his authority over this extensive western region. In 1196 William the
Lion had brought the great northern district of Caithness under
subjection, and severed the southern half of it, which he placed under a
Scotch lord, and in the same reign of Alexander the Second, the
restricted earldom of Caithness passed into the possession of a branch
of the Celtic family of the Earl of Angus, and he died in the island of
Kerreray while endeavouring to wrest the Isles from Norway. In the
following reign the whole kingdom of the Isles passed into the
possession of the Scottish monarch, the last Norwegian king of Man
having died in 1265, and the Isles being formally ceded to Alexander the
Third in 1266; and thus the power of the Norwegians entirely disappeared
from the mainland of Scotland and from the Western Isles, the islands of
Orkney and Shetland alone remaining as a dependency of the kingdom of
Norway.

During the entire duration of this Norwegian kingdom of the Isles, we
see the frequent appearance of a subordinate body termed the Princes or
Chiefs of the Isles,[34] whose recognition of the authority of the king
was necessary to his assumption of that position. We see them electing a
king and occasionally deposing a king; and that this body consisted of
persons partly of Norwegian and partly of Gaelic descent is evident,
from their sometimes deferring to the authority of the king of Norway,
and at other times appealing to Ireland for aid. When the Norwegian
influence was paramount, they would accept the control of the Norwegian
monarch. When the Gaelic influence predominated, they seem invariably to
have fallen back upon the kindred Gael of Ireland, and come under their
influence. The inferior population of the Isles throughout was probably
Gaelic, who formed the actual occupiers of the soil under superior
lords, some of Norwegian and some of native descent.

When the partition of the kingdom of the Isles took place between Olave
and Somerled, the Southern Isles, which thus passed under the rule of a
native lord, would naturally attract to them the Gaelic population, both
chiefs and people, while the chiefs of Norwegian descent would as
naturally withdraw to the Northern Isles, which remained under Norwegian
rule; and thus the Norwegian population would become more restricted to
these islands, while that of the Southern Isles would become more purely
Gaelic; accordingly we find the Norwegian place-names in Skye and the
Long Island are more numerous and more thoroughly spread over the Isles
than in the islands south of the Point of Ardnamurchan, a result we
might also naturally expect from the Norwegian occupation of the former
having lasted a century longer than that of the latter. We should also
expect to find that after the partition of the Isles the Northern
Islands would become comparatively deserted by the lower class of the
population, the actual occupiers of the soil; and the condition of these
islands at this time may be gathered from the Chronicle of Man, where it
tells us that the Norwegian king Reginald ‘gave his brother Olave the
island which is called _Leodhus_ or Lewis, which though larger than any
of the other isles is mountainous, rocky, and almost entirely
inaccessible. It is of course thinly peopled, and the inhabitants live
mostly by hunting and fishing. To this island Olave retired, and lived
in the way of poverty. Seeing the island could not support him and his
followers, he went confidentially to his brother Reginald, who was at
that time resident in the Islands, and thus accosted him: Brother, my
lord and sovereign, thou art conscious that the kingdom of the Isles is
my birthright, but as the Almighty hath appointed thee to rule over
them, I neither envy nor begrudge thee this royal dignity. Let me now
only entreat thee to appoint me some portion of land in the Islands,
where I may live creditably with my people; for the island of _Leodhus_,
which thou hast given me, is insufficient for my maintenance.’[35]
Apparently Reginald saw no way of satisfying his demand, and found an
easier solution in making him prisoner and sending him to King William
the Lion, who imprisoned him during the rest of his reign.

We likewise see from the Chronicle of Man that there was frequent
intermarriage between the two races who occupied the islands, and this
would not only lead to the introduction of personal names of Norwegian
form into families of pure Gaelic descent in the male line, but must to
a great extent have altered the physical type of the Gaelic race in the
islands; but there is no reason to suppose that, after the entire defeat
of the Norwegians in the reign of Alexander the Third, and the cession
of the kingdom of the Isles to him, there remained in them many families
of pure Norwegian descent, and from the population of Scotland, as we
find it in his reign, the Norwegian element, never probably a very
permanent and essential ingredient, must now have entirely disappeared.

[Sidenote: The Estate of the Realm in 1283.]

When the ‘Communitas’ or Estates of Scotland met at Scone on the 5th of
February 1283, to regulate the succession to the crown, we find that the
great holders of the land in Scotland consisted at this time, first, of
thirteen of the great hereditary earldoms, one of which was held by a
family of Anglic descent, and four by Norman barons who had succeeded by
inheritance in the female line to the ancient Celtic earls; and,
secondly, of twenty-four barons, of whom eighteen at least represented
the Norman baronage of the kingdom, while the Celtic element is
represented only by three families descended from Somerled, the great
Celtic Lord of Argyll;[36] and when Edward the First placed the whole of
Scotland under four justiciaries in 1305, we find the country south of
the Firths of Forth and Clyde still divided into the two great districts
of Lothian and Galloway, but the lands beyond the Scottish Sea, that is,
north of these firths, are now for the first time differently grouped,
one division consisting of the country between the river of Forth and
the mountains, and the other of the lands beyond the mountains, or that
part of the country to which the Gaelic population was now
restricted.[37]

[Sidenote: Distinction of population into Teutonic Lowlanders and Gaelic
           Highlanders.]

The account given by Fordun of the distribution of the population in his
day entirely corresponds with this. He says—‘The manners and customs of
the Scots vary with the diversity of their speech, for two languages are
spoken amongst them, the Scottish and the Teutonic, the latter of which
is the language of those who occupy the seaboard and plains, while the
race of Scottish speech inhabits the highlands and outlying islands. The
people of the coast are of domestic and civilised habits, trusty,
patient, and urbane, decent in their attire, affable and peaceful,
devout in divine worship, yet always prone to resist a wrong at the
hands of their enemies. The highlanders and people of the islands, on
the other hand, are a savage and untamed nation, rude and independent,
given to rapine, ease-loving, of a docile and warm disposition, comely
in person but unsightly in dress, hostile to the English people and
language, and, owing to diversity of speech, even to their own nation,
and exceedingly cruel. They are, however, faithful and obedient to their
king and country, and easily made to submit to law if properly
governed.’[38]

This description is no doubt to some extent coloured by the
predilections of one who himself belonged to the low-country population,
but it is not greatly unlike the prejudiced view taken of the
characteristics of the Celtic population by late historians, and the
struggle between the prejudices of the old historian against the
Highland population and his reluctant admission of their better
qualities is apparent enough.

We thus find a Gaelic-speaking people in the Highlands and a
Teutonic-speaking people in the Lowlands. The language of the former is
at an earlier period termed Albanic, and afterwards Scotch, the language
of the latter is by the native writers prior to the sixteenth century
usually termed Inglis; but in the sixteenth the progress of a literature
in the latter tongue led to those who used it calling it Scotch, while
they applied to the Celtic dialect, formerly called Scotch, the epithet
of Irish corrupted into Erse. The Celtic part of the population has
never given any other name to their language than Gaelic, and term the
language of the Lowlanders _Beurla Sassannach_, or the Saxon tongue.

It is the social history and position of this portion of the population
with which we have now to do.




                              CHAPTER II.

                    THE SEVEN PROVINCES OF SCOTLAND.


[Sidenote: Old division of Scotia into provinces.]

During the Celtic period of her history we find Scotland exhibiting a
distribution of her population in separate districts, which is very
analogous to what existed in Ireland at the same period. The latter
country appears from a very early period to have been divided into five
provinces, and these provinces of Udlah or Ulster, Laighean or Leinster,
Mumhan or Munster, and Connacht or Connaught, with Midhe or Meath, were
ruled by provincial kings under the Ardri, or supreme king of Ireland,
who had his royal seat at Teamhar or Tara in Meath.

[Sidenote: Seven provinces in the eighth century.]

In the same way the earliest account we possess of the provincial
distribution of the population of Scotland tells us that Transmarine
Scotland,[39] or the country north of the Firths of Forth and Clyde, was
anciently divided by seven brothers into seven provinces, and that the
principal of these was _Enegus_ with _Moerne_, so called from _Enegus_,
the firstborn of the brothers. This name of _Enegus_ or Angus, now
represented by the county of Forfar, is no doubt the same with the
ancient Celtic personal name of Angus; and _Moerne_, now called Mearns,
or the county of Kincardine, is a corruption of the old Gaelic name
_Maghgherghin_, that is, the plain of Gergin, and is alluded to under
that name in one of the old Lives of St. Patrick.[40] The second
province was _Adtheodle_ and _Gouerin_, or Atholl and Gowry. The old
form of this name of _Adtheodle_ was _Athfodla_, in which form it
appears in the Annals of Tighernac, and _Gouerin_ was probably
_Gabhrin_, a name analogous to the old name of the district of Ossory in
Leinster, which is called Gabhran, pronounced Gowran.[41] The third was
_Sradeern_ and _Meneted_, or Stratherne and Menteath, and there seems no
doubt that the former is the district which appears so frequently in the
Irish Annals under the name of Fortren.[42] The fourth was _Fif_ with
_Fothreve_. The old form of the former name was _Fibh_. The latter name
has entirely disappeared, but was preserved in the deanery of Fothri, in
the diocese of St. Andrews. The two together embraced the entire
peninsula between the Firths of Forth and Tay, and the line of division
between _Fibh_ on the east and _Fothreve_ on the west extended from the
eastern boundary of the county of Fife on the Tay to the mouth of the
river Leven on the Forth. The fifth province consisted of Mar and
Buchan, which still bear these names and form the modern county of
Aberdeen. The sixth was Muref and Ros. The old form of the former name
was _Moreb_, and was applied to a large territory extending along the
southern shore of the Moray Firth from the river Spey, and across the
entire country to the Western Sea. It was anciently separated from Ros
by the river of Beauly, the passage across which was by a ford termed
the Stockford,[43] and the name, which signifies in old Gaelic a
promontory, was very applicable to the peninsula stretching into the
Moray Firth between the Firths of Cromarty and Dornoch. The seventh
province was Cathanesia, within and beyond the mountains, for the
mountain called Mound divides Cathanesia into two parts. This is the
range now called the Ord of Caithness. The old form of the name is
_Caith_, from which the Norwegians formed the name _Katanes_, compounded
of that syllable with the Norwegian word _nes_, signifying a promontory,
and applied it to that part of the province which lay to the north of
the mountains, while they termed the southern half _Sudrland_, from
which comes the modern name of Sutherland. Each province thus consisted
of two districts, forming in all fourteen, and the old description
proceeds to tell us that these seven brothers who thus divided the
country might be considered as seven kings who had under them seven
inferior kings, making fourteen in all, and that the seven kings divided
the kingdom of Alban into seven kingdoms, in which each reigned in his
own time.[44]

As the western region, which formed the Scottish kingdom of Dalriada, is
here omitted, while it includes the district of Caithness, which soon
after the ninth century passed into the possession of the Norwegian
Earls of Orkney, it is obvious that this description applies in the main
to the territory of the Pictish kingdom prior to the accession of the
Scottish dynasty which united it with Dalriada; and we find mention
during this time of the petty kings of _Athfodla_ or Atholl, and of
_Fortren_ or Stratherne,[45] while during the last century of the
independent existence of the Pictish monarchy, the _Ardri_, or supreme
king, had his principal seat at Scone in the district of Gowry.

[Sidenote: Seven provinces in the tenth century.]

The old descriptions then give us another legendary version of these
seven provinces, which the author says were described to him by Andrew,
bishop of Caithness, a Scotsman by birth, and a monk of Dunfermlyn, who
flourished at the time it was compiled, viz., in the first year of the
reign of William the Lion; and if the first account applies to the
Pictish kingdom prior to the ninth century, it is equally clear that
this latter account must be referred to the kingdom of Alban or Scotia
which succeeded it, for it omits altogether the province of Cathanesia,
which had now passed into the possession of the Norwegians, and
substitutes for it a province termed Argathelia, which must have
included within its bounds the territory which had formed the ancient
Scottish kingdom of Dalriada.

The bishop describes the provinces more by their natural boundaries than
by the two large districts included in each. According to his account,
the first kingdom or province extended from that great water, termed in
Scotch _Froch_, that is, Forth, in British or Welsh _Werid_, in Roman
(by which he evidently means Anglic) _Scottewatre_, or the Scottish
Water, which divides the kingdoms of Scotland and England, and flows
past the town of Strivelin or Stirling, as far as that other great river
which is called Tae, or the Tay. This province corresponds in extent
with the third province of the first list, which includes Stratherne and
Menteath. His second province extends to _Hilef_, as the sea encircles
it till it reaches a mountain on the north plain of _Strivelin_ or
Stirling, which is called _Athrin_, by which Athrie in the gorge of the
Ochils can alone be meant. The district of Gowry is situated between the
river Tay and the Isla, if that river be meant by the _Hilef_, but its
eastern boundary is the small stream called the Liff, which is believed
to have been formerly the channel through which the Isla reached the sea
instead of flowing into the Tay, and that part of this province which is
encircled by the sea points plainly to the great peninsula between the
Firths of Tay and Forth. This province, therefore, does not entirely
correspond with any of the provinces in the first list, but is formed of
its fourth province of Fife and Fothreve, with the addition of Gowry.
The bishop’s third province extends from Hilef to the Dee, and
corresponds with the first province in the first list, containing the
district of Angus and Mearns. His fourth province extends from the Dee
to that great and wonderful river termed the _Spe_ or Spey, the greatest
and best of all Scotia. This province, therefore, corresponds with the
fifth province in the first list containing Mar and Buchan. The fifth
province extended from the Spey to the mountain _Bruinalban_ or
Breadalbane, and corresponds with that part of the second province of
the first list termed _Adtheodle_ or Atholl. The sixth province is Muref
and Ros, which is the same with the sixth province in the first list;
and the seventh is _Arregaithel_. The changes thus produced upon the
provincial distribution of the population by the formation of the
kingdom of Alban or Scotia in the ninth century were, first, that in
place of the province of Fife and Fothreve, we now find a larger
province, including Gowry, with Scone, the royal seat of the _Ardri_, or
supreme king; and here, probably, the chief settlements of the Scots had
been made, and the chief power and influence of the kings of Scottish
race were formed. It lay between the provinces of Stratherne and
Menteath or _Fortren_ on the south-west, and of Angus and Mearns or
_Maghgherghinn_ on the north-east, where, during the period of this
dynasty, the men of Fortren on the one hand and the men of Mearns on the
other appear as a separate people, and probably represented those
remains of the older population which still preserved a separate
existence.

The separation of Atholl from Gowry, and the fact that the first five
provinces are described by their natural boundaries, while the sixth
retains its older designation of Muref and Ros, rather points to the
great mountain barrier which separates the Highlands from the Lowlands
now assuming greater significance in the tribal distribution, the
population within it being less affected by the change of dynasty and
retaining more of their older constitution. Thus we find at this period
the older title of _Ri_ or king still appearing in the province of Moray
only.[46]

The great change, however, in this list is the disappearance of
Cathanesia or Caithness and Sutherland from the provinces, and the
substitution of Arregaithel for it. The former had become in the tenth
century a possession of the Norwegian Jarls of Orkney, and the separate
petty kingdom of Dalriada had ceased to exist. The name of Arregaithel,
however, must not be held as synonymous with that of Dalriada, but
appears to have been applied to a much larger district than that which
formed that small kingdom. In a former part of the description, the
author terms it the principal or largest part of the country on its west
side, over against the Irish Sea, and talks of the mountains which
separate it from Scotia; and we can see from the references to it in one
of the statutes of William the Lion, in the first year of whose reign
this description was written, that it comprised, in fact, the entire
western seaboard of Scotland, and included not only the territory which
had formed the kingdom of Dalriada, but also the western districts of
the province of Moray and Ross. In this statute a distinction is drawn
between the country situated between the Forth, the river Spey, and
Drumalban, and the districts beyond these limits, which consist of
Moravia or Moray, Ros, Katanes or Caithness, Ergadia, and Kintyre.
Ergadia here is merely the Latin form of _Arregaithel_, and Kintyre had
been separated from it when the Western Isles were ceded in the end of
the eleventh century to Magnus, king of Norway, who, by a stratagem,
included it in the Norwegian kingdom of the Isles. We find, however, in
the same statute ‘Ergadia which belongs to Scotia’ or the southern part
of it, distinguished from ‘Ergadia which belongs to Moravia,’ or that
part which formed the western districts of Moray; and in a charter by
King Robert the Bruce reviving the old earldom of Moravia, it is said to
extend to the boundary of ‘northern Ergadia, which belongs to the Earl
of Ross.’[47]

The author of the description, who is usually supposed to have been
Giraldus Cambrensis, but whose etymologies show him to have been
evidently a Welshman and acquainted with the Welsh language, gives us
four interpretations of the name Arregaithel. He says it is so called as
‘the margin of the Scots or Irish,’ for all the Irish and Scots are
generally called Gattheli, from their original leader _Gaithelglas_; or
because the Scotti Picti first peopled it after their return from
Ireland;[48] or because the Irish occupied these parts after the Picts;
or, what is more certain, because that part of the country of Scotia is
more closely connected with the country of Ireland.

In the Irish Annals the form of the name is _Airergaidhel_, _Airer_
signifying a district.[49] The Scotch form is _Earrgaoidheal_ from
_Earr_, a limit or boundary, and this approaches most nearly to the form
of the name in the old description, with its etymology of margin or
limit of the Gael. The oldest name is that probably in the Albanic Duan,
where it is termed _Oirir Alban_, or the coast lands of Alban, from
_Oirthir_, a coast or border; and we find the name _Oirir_ applied to it
in the Book of Clanranald, which distinguishes the _Oirir a tuath_, or
northern Oirir, and the _Oirir a deas_, or the southern Oirir, from each
other. The name given to this district by the Norwegians was _Dali_ or
_Dalir_, the Dales, and Somerled, the Regulus of Arregaithel, and his
family, are termed in the Orkneyinga Saga the _Dalveria Aett_, or family
of the Dales.[50]

[Sidenote: Districts ruled by kings and afterwards by Mormaers.]

Such being the territorial divisions of Scotland at this period, we
find, in place of each province being under the rule of a _Ri_ or king,
with a subordinate division under a sub-king that, with the exception of
_Arregaithel_ or Argyll, the rulers of the whole of these districts now
bear the name of Mormaer or great Maer or Steward, while the Mormaer of
Moreb or Moray appears occasionally under the title of _Ri_ or king.
These Mormaers held a position in the scale of power and dignity
inferior only to the _Ardri_ or supreme king. Thus, in narrating the
great battle fought in 918 between the Danes and the people of Alban, in
the reign of Constantin, son of Aedh, king of Alban, the Irish Annals
tell us that neither their king nor any of their Mormaers fell by
him;[51] and the Pictish Chronicle mentions in the same reign the death
of Dubucan, son of Indrechtaig, Mormaer Ængusa, or of Angus.[52] In 965
Dubdon Satrapas Athochlach, that is, Governor of Athole, by which title
the Mormaer is probably meant, fell in battle, according to the Pictish
Chronicle. The same chronicle records in the reign of Cullen, who died
in 970, the death of Maelbrigdi, son of Dubucan the Mormaer of Angus;
and in 976 Tighernac tells us that three Mormaers of Alban, whose names
he gives us as Cellach son of Findgaine, Cellach son of Baredha, and
Duncan son of Morgaind, took part in a foray by one of the petty kings
of Ireland against another.[53]

The reign of Malcolm the Second, who ascended the throne in 1004, and
whose thirty years’ rule over Alban was distinguished by the acquisition
of the cismarine territories south of the Firths of Forth and Clyde,
throws still further light upon the position of these provincial rulers.
In the early part of his reign the great conflict took place between the
Danes of Dublin and the native Irish under their great king Brian
Boroimhe, which was to determine whether the Galls or foreign hordes of
Scandinavia or the native Gaedheal were to retain possession of Ireland;
a conflict terminated in favour of the Gaedheal when the battle of
Clontarf was won in the year 1014 by Brian, the _Ardri_, or supreme king
of Ireland, though, like some other victorious generals, he lost his own
life in the struggle. In this great conflict we find the people of the
provinces taking part on both sides; those in the possession of the
Norwegians siding with the Danes, and those under native rule taking
part with King Brian. To the assistance of the Danes came Sigurd,
Norwegian Earl of Orkney, with the host of the Orkneys and of the
Norwegian Islands, the Galls or Norwegians of Caithness and Mann. Skye,
Lewis, Kintyre, and _Oirergaidhel_ or Argyll, are especially mentioned
as being on the Danish side. On the other hand, ten Mormaers followed
Brian with foreign auxiliaries, who probably represented the districts
in Alban under native rule, and the leading man among them appears to
have been Donald, son of Eimin, son of Cainnech, Mormaer of Mar, who
fell in the battle of Clontarf.[54]

In this reign the Mormaers of Moreb or Moray come very prominently
forward, and show us the title hereditarily borne by a very powerful
family, which eventually placed two of its members on the throne. The
first who appears is Findlaec the son of Ruadri, Mormaer Moreb, whose
death is recorded at 1020, when he was slain by the sons of his brother
Maelbrigdi. This Findlaec is obviously the Finnleikr Jarl who is
mentioned in one of the Norse Sagas as defending his district in
Scotland against Sigurd the Norwegian Jarl of Orkney, who eventually
conquered Myrhaevi of Moray and Ross.[55] In 1029 the death of Malcolm,
son of Maelbrigdi, son of Ruadri, is recorded, when he bears the title
of Ri or king. He is obviously the son of that Maelbrigdi, the brother
of Findlaec; and in 1032 Gillacomgan, son of Maelbrigdi, Mormaer of
Moreb, was burnt with fifty of his men. The son of Findlaec was Macbeth,
who afterwards usurped the throne of Scotland, and the son of
Gillacomgan was Lulach, who succeeded him for the short space of three
months.[56]

[Sidenote: Petty kings of Argyll and Galloway.]

In the same reign we find also the petty kings of _Arregaithel_ or
Argyll and _Gallgaithel_ or Galloway making their first appearance. In
the year 1031, when Cnut, the Danish king of England, invaded Scotland,
he is said to have received the submission of Malcolm, king of the
Scots, and of two other kings, Maelbaethe and Iehmarc. These kings
appear to have represented the districts beyond the rivers Spey and
Drumalban, which at this time formed the boundary of Scotland proper on
the north-west and west; for Maelbaethe can be no other than the
celebrated Macbeth, who was then Mormaer of Moreb or Moray, and Iehmarc
may be identified with Imergi, who appears in the old Irish Genealogies
as ancestor of Somerled the petty king of Argyll.[57] The Irish Annals
record in the same year in which king Malcolm died, the death also of
Suibne, son of Kenneth, Ri or king of Gallgaidel. This name, which
appears to have been applied in the Irish Annals as a general name of
the Gaedhel or Gael of the Western Isles and of the districts lying
along the coast, who became subject to and adopted the manners of the
Norwegian pirates or Galls, was, as a territorial name, used in a more
restricted sense, and appropriated to the district of Galloway, a name
which in its Latin form of Galwethia is derived from the Welsh
equivalent of Galwyddel. The Norwegians knew it by the name of
Gaddgeddla, a district said in the Orkneyinga Saga to be ‘at the place
where Scotland and England meet.’[58]

[Sidenote: Jarl Thorfinn.]

On the death of Malcolm the Second in the year 1034 the dynasty of
Scottish kings, which had been established on the Pictish throne nearly
three centuries previously, came to an end. There appears to have been
no male descendant left who could claim the crown, and the succession
opened to his grandson by his eldest daughter. So far as the districts
south of the Firths of Forth and Clyde were concerned, his claim was not
opposed to the law of succession which previously prevailed there, and
though inconsistent with the law of tanistry which regulated the
succession to the crown among the Scots, it had been so far modified
that the right of the heir-female to succeed in default of heirs-male
appears to have been recognised in such an emergency, but the change was
too recent to have acquired a firm and permanent place in the law of the
country; and here the right of Duncan, the son of the eldest daughter,
was contested by Thorfinn, the most powerful of the Norwegian Jarls of
Orkney, whose mother was likewise a daughter of Malcolm II.; and a war
of succession followed, which was terminated by the death of King Duncan
in 1040. According to a contemporary writer, he was slain by the
commander of his own army, Macbethad, son of Findlaech, who succeeded
him.[59] This was Macbeth, the Ri or Mormaer of Moray, who appears to
have treacherously joined the Norwegian Jarl and slain his king, in
hopes of obtaining, with the assistance of the former, the Scottish
crown.

We are told by the Orkneyinga Saga that Thorfinn then followed the
routed army, and subjected the land to himself as far south as Fifi or
Fife; that he drove those who resisted him to the deserts and the woods,
and subdued the country wherever he went; and that till the day of his
death he possessed nine jarldoms in Scotland and the whole of the
Sudreys or Western Isles.[60] These jarldoms were no doubt the districts
ruled by the native Mormaers, and, if his conquest embraced merely the
low country as far south as Fife, the districts which he had not
subjected consisted merely of the province composed of Gowry, Fife, and
Fothreve, the province of Athol, and that consisting of Stratherne and
Menteath. Over these, within which Scone, the capital of the kingdom,
was situated, Macbeth appears to have ruled as king, while the districts
of Lothian and Cumbria recognised the son of Duncan as their legitimate
monarch, with the exception of the Gaelic territory of Galloway, which
was under Norwegian rule.

In 1054, Malcolm, the eldest son of Duncan, who is termed by the
historians son of the king of the Cumbrians, with the assistance of
Siward, earl of Northumbria, drove Macbeth from his kingdom and regained
possession of its capital, Scone; and on the death of Thornfinn in 1057
Macbeth was driven north and slain within no great distance from the
frontier of his native province of Moray, and Malcolm’s rule was
extended over the whole kingdom as its legitimate monarch. We are told
in the Orkneyinga Saga that Thorfinn ‘was much lamented in his own land,
but in those lands which he had subjected to himself by conquest the
natives were no longer content under his government; consequently many
_rikis_ which the earl had subjected fell off, and their inhabitants
sought the protection of those native chiefs who were territorially born
to rule over them.’[61] These _rikis_ were no doubt the districts
subdued by Thorfinn, which now passed again under the rule of their
native Mormaers, and it is rather remarkable that, with the exception of
the districts of Stratherne and Menteath, when we can trace the position
of the remaining districts, consisting of Athol, Gowry, Fife, and
Fothreve, we find them in the possession of the Crown, and ruled over by
members of the royal family.[62]

[Sidenote: Mormaers termed by Norwegians Jarls.]

By the Norwegians these Mormaers seem to have been viewed as holding the
same position as the Norwegian Jarls, and this name is invariably given
to them in the Sagas. Like them, they were viewed as the hereditary
rulers of the territory with which they were connected, and as
protecting the rights of the Crown within its bounds. That the office,
whatever it was, was held hereditarily by the same family we see in the
notices of two of these families preserved in the Pictish Chronicle and
in the Irish Annals. In the one we find Dubucan, son of Indrechtaig,
Mormaer of Angus, succeeded by his son Maelbrigdi; and in the other we
see the family of Ruadri filling the office of Mormaer of Moray, and the
succession apparently following the Irish law of tanistry, and
alternating between the descendants of his two sons Maelbrigdi and
Findlaec; and when this family was finally driven from the throne in the
person of Lulach, the grandson of the former, we find his son
Maelsnectai appearing as _Ri Muireb_ or king of Moray, from whom it
passed through his sister to Ængus, termed in the Annals ‘son of the
daughter of Lulaig.’[63]

[Sidenote: Mormaers of Buchan from the Book of Deer.]

A more complete revelation, however, is made to us with regard to the
Mormaers of another district, that of Buchan, in the Book of Deer, which
contains the usual memoranda of the old grants made to that monastery
while still retaining its character as an old Celtic foundation. Here
the names of seven of the old Mormaers during the five centuries and a
half which elapsed between the foundation of the Celtic monastery in the
time of Columcille and the reign of David the First are given. We are
told that Bede _Cruthnech_, or the Pict, Mormaer of Buchan, gave the
_cathair_ or city _Abbordoboir_, now Aberdour, on the south shore of the
Moray Firth, to Columcille and Drostan, and afterwards certain lands
called also a _cathair_ or city, to which Columcille gave the name of
Dear. He seems to have been followed by Comgall, son of Aeda, who made a
grant to Columcille and Drostan. After him we have Matan son of Cearill,
Domhnall son of Giric, and Domnall son of Ruadri, but there is nothing
to show what the connection of these Mormaers with each other was or
when they lived, but the dignity then passes to a family called Mac
Dobharcon.[64] Two brothers, Domhnall son of Mac Dobharcon, and
Cainneach son of Mac Dobharcon, follow each other as Mormaers, and the
latter is succeeded by his son Gartnait, who, with his wife Ete,
daughter of Gillemichel, makes a grant in the eighth year of King David,
that is, in 1132.

The succession among these latter Mormaers seems to follow the same rule
of tanistic succession which we have seen among the Mormaers of Moray.

[Sidenote: Toisechs of Buchan.]

The same valuable record, however, makes a further revelation regarding
the organisation of those districts ruled over by the Mormaers. It shows
us that the next rank under the Mormaers of Buchan was held by persons
termed Toisechs, who possessed a similar relation in a subordinate
capacity to the land and the people. Thus we find that Bede the Pict
grants Abbordoboir free from the claim of Mormaer and of Toisech, and in
the grants of land by the subsequent Mormaers there is usually
associated with them the Toisech as having an interest in the subject of
the grant. Among these Toisechs a family descended from Morcunn or
Morgan appears very prominent. Thus Comgall, son of Aeda, grants the
land from Orti to Furerie, and Mondac, son of Morcunn, gave Pette mic
Garnait and Achad Toche Temni, and it is added that ‘one was Mormaer and
the other was Toisec.’[65] Then Cathal, son of Morcunt, gives
Achadnagleree; and Domhnall mac Giric, the fourth Mormaer named, and
Maelbrigdi, son of Cathal the Toisech, gives Pett in Mulenn; and finally
Colban, Mormaer of Buchan, and Eva, daughter of Garnait (the previous
Mormaer), his wife, and Donnachac, Toisech of the clan Morgainn,
mortmained all the foregoing offerings to God, Drostan, Colcumcille, and
Peter, free of all burdens except four davachs of such burdens as come
upon chief residences of Alban and chief churches. Among the witnesses
to this grant are Morgunn and Gillepetair, sons of Donnachach, and
others who are called _Maithi_, that is, good men or nobles of Buchan.
Another family of Toisechs which appears is that descended from Batni.
Thus Matan, son of Cairill, who is the third-named Mormaer, gives the
Mormaer’s share in Altere, now Altrie; and Culi, son of Batni, gives the
Toisech’s share. Then Domhnall, son of Ruadri, the fifth-named Mormaer,
and Malcolm, son of Culi, give Bidhen, now Biffie; and here the king
comes in as also possessing rights in these lands, for Malcolm, son of
Cinaetha, or Malcolm II., gives the king’s share in Bidhen, Pett mic
Gobroig, and the two davachs of Upper Rosabard. Then Domhnall, son of
Mac Dubhacinn, mortmains all these offerings to Drostan upon giving the
whole of them to him, and Cathal mortmains in the same way his Toisech’s
share. They also give Eddarun, and Cainnech, son of Mac Dobharcon, and
the same Cathal give Alterin of Ailvethenamone; and then it is added
Cainnech, Domhnall, and Cathal mortmained all these offerings free from
Mormaer and Toisech. It is unnecessary to notice the other grants
further than that Comgall, son of Cainnaig, Toisech of Clan Canan, gives
certain lands free from Toisech. Thus in the organisation of these
districts we find a gradation of persons possessing territorial rights
within them, consisting of the Ardri or supreme king, the Mormaer, and
the Toisech, and the latter of these appears as not only possessing
rights in connection thawith the land, but also standing in a relation
to the tribe or clan which occupied them as their leader.[66] The same
record discloses a similar connection between the Mormaer and the land
in the person of two of the Mormaers of Moray. Thus Malcolm, the son of
Ruadri, who died in 1029, gives the Delerc, and Malsnectai, the son of
Lulach, the successor of Macbeth as usurper of the throne, gives
Pettmalduib to Drostan. These lands were probably within the province of
Moray ruled by them, and we are told by the Saxon Chronicle that ‘in
1078 King Malcolm won the mother of Maelslaht or Maelsnectai and all his
best men,’ an expression similar to that of the _Maithi_ or good men of
Buchan, which, as we have seen, included the Toisech ‘and all his
treasure and his cattle,’ and he himself escaped with difficulty. His
death as _Ri Moreb_, or king of Moray, is recorded, as we have seen, in
1080.

[Sidenote: Seven earls first appear in reign of Alexander the First.]

On the death of Eadgar, the successor of Malcolm III., his brother
Alexander the First ruled as king over Scotland proper, while Lothian
and Cumbria or Strathclyde fell to his brother David. From the time when
the Celtic king Malcolm had married the Saxon princess Margaret there
had been an increasing Saxon influence in the government of the Celtic
provinces; and when his sons by that princess had been firmly
established on the throne by foreign aid, in opposition to the attempt
of their father’s brother to maintain his right under the older law of
succession, with the assistance of the Gaelic population, and found
their chief support in the Anglic population of Lothian and the Merse,
the reigns of Eadgar and Alexander the First must be viewed as
essentially those of Saxon monarchs modelling their kingdom in
accordance with Saxon institutions; while the object of David from the
first, both while he governed the southern districts as earl and the
whole of Scotland as king, was to introduce the feudal system of Norman
England into Scotland, and adapt her institutions to feudal forms.

The charters of Eadgar relate mainly to land south of the Firths of
Forth and Clyde, and we find that the immediate dependants of the Court,
who formed the witnesses to these charters, were certainly Saxons; and
when Alexander the First founded the monastery of Scone after the
attempt made upon his life by the Gaelic population of the northern
provinces, we find that the foundation charter is framed upon the model
of the Saxon charters. Like the latter, which were granted with the
assent of the members of the Witenagemot, who subscribe the charter as
consenting parties with the designation of Episcopus and Abbas if
churchmen, and of Comes or Dux if earls, without the addition of the
diocese, monastery, or earldom with which they were connected; so we
find this charter granted with the consent of nine persons, two of whom
have the simple designation of Episcopus, who are followed by seven
others, six of whom have the word Comes or Earl after their names; and
the only one who is not so designated is Gospatrick, whom we know to
have been at the time Earl of Dunbar, and who probably represented that
part of Lothian attached to Alexander’s kingdom. The other six must of
course have represented the districts of transmarine Scotland, which
properly formed Alexander’s dominions. We thus find in his reign a body
constituted somewhat similarly to that portion of the Witenagemot of the
Saxon monarchs, and exercising similar functions.[67] The six persons,
however, who bear the title of Comes are Beth, Mallus, Madach, Rothri,
Gartnach, and Dufagan, and of these we can identify four. Mallus is
undoubtedly the Mallus Comes Stradarniæ or Earl of Stratherne, who took
such a prominent part in the Battle of the Standard.[68] Madach is that
Maddach, _Jarl of Atjoklum_, or Earl of Atholl, said in the Orkneyinga
Saga to be the son of Melkolfr or Melmare, brother of Malcolm the
Third.[69] Rothri appears in a charter in the Book of Deer, granted in
the eighth year of King David, as Ruadri, Mormaer of Mar; and Gartnach
is the Gartnait, son of Cainnech, Mormaer of Buchan, who grants the
charter. The remaining two, Beth and Dufagan, cannot be identified with
certainty, but the resemblance of the name of the latter to Dubican, who
appears at an earlier date as Mormaer of Angus, leads to the supposition
that he may have filled that position. At all events there is enough to
show that the six persons who appear with the title of Comes as
representing the districts north of the Firths, were the same persons
whom we have hitherto found in connection with these districts bearing
the title of Mormaer; and thus the great Celtic chiefs of the country,
to whom the Norwegians applied the Norwegian title of Jarl, which was a
personal dignity though given in connection with a territory, now appear
bearing the Saxon title of Comes or Earl, and the Celtic title of
Mormaer, probably official in its origin, was now merged in a personal
dignity.[70]

In one of the earliest charters in King David’s reign, we find a slight
change in the position of these _comites_. It is the first of David’s
charters to the monastery of Dunfermline, and in this charter five
bishops appear who alone prefix to their names the word ‘Ego,’ and add
the title of Episcopus simply with the word confirmed; and then follows
a list of names of persons who are said to be ‘hujus privilegii testes
et assertores,’ and these are headed by five earls—viz., Ed Comes,
Constantinus Comes, Malise Comes, Rotheri Comes, and Madeth Comes.[71]
The last three are obviously the same with three of the earls who
subscribe the Scone charter, and who, we have seen, had been Mormaers of
Stratherne, Mar, and Atholl. Constantin appears in a subsequent charter,
where King David grants to Dunfermlin ‘the whole shyre of Kirkcaldy,
which Earl Constantine held from them by force, in perpetual charity,’
and this charter is simply witnessed by three bishops and three
earls—viz., Madeth Comes, Malis Comes, Head Comes.[72] Constantin,
however, appears in two documents in the Chartulary of St. Andrews, in
which he is described as Earl of Fife. In the first, which is the
memorandum of the grant by Edelrad, son of Malcolm, king of Scotland,
abbot of Dunkeld, and also Earl of Fife, of the lands of Admore, it is
said to have been confirmed by his brothers David and Alexander ‘in
presentia multorum virorum fide dignorum scilicet Constantini Comitis de
Fyf viri discretissimi.’ The second is a perambulation of the boundaries
of Kirkness and Lochore, when the king sends his messengers through the
province of Fyf and Fothrithi, and summons many of their people in one
place—viz., Constantinem Comitem de Fyf virum discretum et facundum cum
satrapys et satellitibus et exercitu de Fyf et Macbeath Thaynetum de
Falleland (Falkland), etc. The dispute is then referred to ‘tres viros
legales et idoneos,’ the first of whom is ‘Constantinus Comes de Fyf
magnus judex in Scotia.’[73] We thus see that one of the principal
functions of these old Mormaers, who now appear as comites or earls, was
judicial, and it is probable that the title of Magnus judex, or great
judge, given to Constantin, is simply the Latin equivalent of the Celtic
title of Mormaer, or great maer, and by the ‘satrapes,’ probably the
same persons are meant who appear in the Book of Deer with the Celtic
title of Toiseach. The ‘Ed comes’ who precedes Constantin in the first
of King David’s charters may possibly be the same person as the ‘Head
comes’ who witnesses the second, but neither can be identified.[74]

During the entire reign of David the First these earls appear simply
with the designation of Comes without any territorial addition, with two
exceptions, which occur towards the end of his reign. In the earliest
charter the earls who witness it, among whom is Constantin, are followed
by other witnesses, partly officers of state, as the chancellors, partly
Norman barons, and a few Celtic names which have no designation, and the
first witness who follows the earls and precedes the chancellor is
Gillemichel Makduf. In the foundation charter of Holyrood, granted not
long after, he follows the chancellor and the chamberlain as Gillemichel
Comes, and in a subsequent charter to Dunfermline he again precedes them
as Gillemichel Comes de Fif. In a charter in the Book of Deer, which
must have been granted in the last year of David’s reign, the earl who
succeeded Gillemichel appears as Dunchad, Comes de Fif, and along with
him, for the first time, appears Gillebride, Comes de Angus. Gillemichel
has usually been supposed to be the son of Constantin, but this has
arisen solely from the preconceived notion that all the ancient Earls of
Fife bore the name of Macduff. There is, however, no evidence of any
connection between them, and it is obviously quite inconsistent with the
character of their appearance as witnesses in the same charter.

[Sidenote: Policy of David I. to feudalise Celtic earldoms.]

There is no doubt that David’s object, on his accession to the throne,
was to feudalise the whole kingdom, by importing feudal forms and feudal
holdings into it, and to place the leading dignitaries of the kingdom in
the position of Crown vassals, as well as to introduce a Norman
baronage. The relation of those old Celtic earls or Mormaers towards the
Crown on the one hand, had hitherto been purely official, and that
towards the districts with which their names were connected was not a
purely territorial one. It was more a relation towards the tribes who
peopled it than towards the land. David’s desire, certainly, would be to
place them, whenever opportunity offered in the position of holding the
land they were officially connected with as an earldom of the Crown in
chief, in the same manner as the barons held their baronies, and in
these cases he may have inaugurated the policy undoubtedly followed, as
we shall see, by his successors.

Gillemichel Macduff, from his position in the earliest charter, must
have held a high position as a follower of the king, and may have
rendered him great services, which legend drew back to the usurpation of
the throne of his ancestor Duncan by Macbeth, and led to the creation of
the fictitious Macduff, who makes his first appearance in Fordun’s
Chronicle, and after Constantin’s death Gillemichel may first have had
the personal title of Comes or Earl bestowed upon him, and then been
feudally invested with the Earldom of Fife, which thus may have become a
territorial title in his person. It certainly did so in that of his
successor Duncan, who received from David a charter of the earldom,
which was confirmed to his successors by the subsequent kings;[75] and a
similar feudal investiture of the earldom of Angus in the person of
Gillibride may have added that old Celtic earldom likewise to the
number, as from this time, when we find the older earldoms still
conferring no territorial designation on their earls, Gillibride
invariably appears along with them as Earl of Angus. During the earlier
part of the reign of Malcolm IV. no change appears to have been made in
the position of the existing earldoms. His first charter after his
accession appears to have been his confirmation of the grants to the
monastery of Dunfermline, and this charter is witnessed first by six
bishops, then by twelve barons, most of whom were Normans, and other
foreigners, and then by six of the earls (De Comitibus), who are thus
named: Gospatricius Comes, Ferteth Comes, Duncanus Comes, Morgund Comes,
Melcolmus Comes, et Comes de Engus. The five preceding earls were those
of Dunbar, Stratherne, Fife, Mar, and Athol, the earl of Buchan, who
would make up the number of the seven earls, not appearing among them.
To this number a temporary addition was made by Malcolm, when, on making
peace with Malcolm macHeth, the pretended son of Earl Angus of Moray, in
1157, he gave him the district of Ros with the title of earl; but the
inhabitants soon rose against him and drove him out.

An event, however, took place soon after, which led to the policy
inaugurated by David the First, of feudalising these earldoms, being
resumed by Malcolm and still further carried out by his successor. This
was the attack made upon the king by six of the old Celtic earls, when,
under the leadership of Ferteth, earl of Stratherne, they besieged him
in Perth in the year 1160. Fordun, quoting from the Chronicle of
Melrose, says, ‘Six earls—Ferchard, Earl of Stratherne, to wit, and five
other earls—being stirred up against the king, not to compass any
selfish end, or through treason, but rather to guard the common weal,
sought to take him, and laid siege to the keep of that town (Perth). God
so ordering it, however, their undertaking was brought to nought for the
nonce, and after not many days had rolled by, he was, by the advice of
the clergy, brought back to a good understanding with his nobles.’[76]
An expression in the Orkneyinga Saga would lead us to infer that the
object of the six Celtic earls was to put up the young son of William
Fitz Duncan, who was usually called the Boy of Egremont, and as grandson
of King Duncan, the eldest son of Malcolm III. by Ingibiorg, widow of
Earl Thorfinn of Orkney, had a direct claim to the throne, which would
commend itself both to the Gaelic and to the Norwegian population in
preference to the descendants of the Saxon princess Margaret.[77]
Wyntoun gives us the following account of this occurrence:—

                  A mayster-man called Feretawche,
                  Wyth Gyllandrys Ergemawche,
                  And other mayster-men thare fyve,
                  Agayne the king than ras belyve;
                  For caws that the past till Twlows,
                  Agayne hym thai ware all irows:
                  Forthi thai set thame hym to ta
                  In till Perth, or than hym sla.
                  But the kyng rycht manlyly
                  Swne skalyd all that cumpany,
                  And tuk and slwe.[78]

Wyntoun here associates with the five earls who followed Ferteth, the
Earl of Stratherne, Gillandrys Ergemawche. If two persons are meant,
Ergemawche may be a corruption of Egremont, and Gillandres may have
represented the old Celtic earls of Ross, as the clan bearing the name
of Ross are called in Gaelic _Clan Ghilleanrias_, or descendants of
Gillandres, and may have led the revolt which drove Malcolm macHeth out
of the earldom.

[Sidenote: Creation of additional earldoms.]

Each of the seven provinces of Scotland consisted, as we have seen, of
two districts, and we find a Mormaer ruling over each: but when they
appear in the reign of Alexander the First, under the name of Comes or
Earl, we find the number reduced to six; and with the exception of the
province consisting of the two districts of Mar and Buchan, each of
which is represented by an earl, the other provinces appear with one of
its two districts possessing an earl, and the other remaining
unrepresented. It was these six earls, no doubt, who formed the party
who attacked the king in Perth, and one feature of the new policy
appears to have been to increase their number by appointing new earls to
the vacant districts, who were feudally invested with their earldoms,
and thus introducing a large feudal element into the old Celtic
earldoms, while those which retained their original character would be
gradually feudalised as opportunity offered. Malcolm had thus restored
one of these vacant districts when he made Malcolm macHeth Earl of Ross;
and when that earl was driven out by the inhabitants, he endeavoured to
connect it still more closely with the Crown, by giving the earldom to
Florence, Count of Holland, in marriage with his sister Ada in 1162, but
this grant, too, did not practically take effect.[79] Two years after he
added another in the district of Menteath, which, along with Stratherne,
formed one of the old provinces of Scotland. ‘Gillechrist, Comes de
Menteth,’ makes his first appearance as witness in a charter granted by
King Malcolm to the canons of Scone in 1164; and in the same charter we
have Gillebride Comes de Angus and Malcolm Comes appearing for the first
time with the territorial designation of ‘De Ethoel.’

The policy thus inaugurated by David the First as entering into his plan
for transforming the old Celtic kingdom of the Scots into a feudal
monarchy, and to some extent carried out by Malcolm the Fourth, was
still more vigorously prosecuted by his successor William the Lion; and
we find that during his reign he converted two of the old earldoms into
feudal holdings, that a third had passed by gift and a fourth by
succession into the hands of Norman barons, and that he added four new
earldoms to the number.

[Sidenote: Earldom of Mar.]

We have seen that during the reign of Alexander the First and the early
part of the reign of David, Ruadri or Rotheri, who had been Mormaer of
Mar, appears witnessing the royal charters, with the personal title of
Comes or Earl. He was followed, during the latter part of the reign of
David and during that of his successor Malcolm IV., by Morgundus or
Morgund, who also bears the personal title of Comes or Earl; but in the
early part of the reign of William the Lion, when the territorial
designations became more common, he is superseded by a certain
Gilchrist, Earl of Mar, and Gilchrist, in his turn, makes way in 1171
for Morgund again. The explanation of this apparent contest for the
position of earl is furnished us by the controversy which afterwards
took place between the family of De Lundin, who were the kings
hereditary _Hostiarii_ or doorkeepers, and from that office took the
name of Doorward or Durward. It appears from this controversy that
Morgund was alleged to be illegitimate, and King William had probably
taken advantage of this flaw in his title to break the succession of the
old Celtic earls by recognising Gilchrist, the next lawful heir, as
earl. This Gilchrist had married Orabilis, the daughter of Ness, son of
William, one of the foreign settlers in Fife, and his daughter was the
mother of Thomas de Lundin, the king’s Hostiary or Doorward, and carried
the claims of the lawful heirs into this family.[80] It is probable,
however, that this illegitimacy, though possibly well founded according
to the canon law, was not recognised as such by the Celtic customs, and
an arrangement seems to have been come to by which Morgund agreed to
receive from the king the investiture of the earldom as a feudal
holding, while the claims of the rival party were satisfied by a large
tract of land between the rivers Dee and Don, which was withdrawn from
the earldom and became the property of the Durwards. There is preserved
a deed by King William, in which he narrates that Morgund, son of
Gillocher, formerly Earl of Mar, appeared before him in June 1171 and
was invested with the earldom of Mar, in which his father had died vest
and seized, and which was now granted to him and his heirs
whatsoever.[81] It may perhaps be doubted whether this is an original
deed; but there can be little doubt that it contains the record of a
real transaction by which the earldom was converted into a purely feudal
holding, which, like all such holdings created at this time, was
descendible to heirs-female.

[Sidenote: Earldoms of Garvyach and Levenach.]

The policy followed by King William, with regard to these earldoms, was
checked for a time by the unfortunate result of his attempt in 1174 to
recover possession of the northern provinces of England, when he was
taken prisoner, and only recovered his liberty by surrendering the
independence of his kingdom; but soon after his liberation, when he
returned to Scotland, he appears to have created two new earldoms, which
he bestowed upon his brother David. The first was the earldom of
Garvyach or Garrioch in Aberdeenshire, formed from the districts
surrounding the ancient fortification of Dunideer, and extending between
the river Don and its tributary the Ury. The second was the earldom of
Levenach or Lennox, and consisted of the northern part of the old
Cumbrian kingdom, which appears to have received a Gaelic population,
and is nearly represented by the county of Dumbarton.[82] These
districts were probably at the time in the hands of the Crown. The
earldom of Garvyach passed on David’s death to his son John the Scot,
after whose death it again reverted to the Crown, and was eventually
granted as a lordship to the earls of Mar. The earldom of Levenach does
not appear to have remained long in Earl David’s possession, as we find
it emerging in the possession of a line of Celtic earls, the first of
whom, Aluin, must have received it as early as the year 1193. Earl David
was invested with the English earldom of Huntingdon on the death of its
then possessor, Simon de Senlis, in 1184; and it is probable that on
that occasion he resigned the earldom of Lennox in favour of the head of
its Gaelic population.[83]

[Sidenote: Earldoms of Ross and Carrick.]

In 1179 William the Lion brought the people of Ross under more complete
subjection to the Crown, and built two royal castles within its bounds,
but he appears to have retained the earldom in his own hands, as the
Count of Holland complains that he had been deprived of it, although he
had never been forfeited. His grievance was probably not a very
substantial one, as it is very unlikely that he either had obtained or
could obtain practical possession of it. Seven years after the king
formed a second earldom out of the territory of the old Cumbrian
kingdom, at its southwestern extremity, where it bordered upon the
Gaelic district of Galloway, and appears to have received a Gaelic
population from thence. This was the district of Carrick, which he
bestowed as an earldom upon Duncan, son of Gilbert, and grandson of
Fergus, the Celtic Lord of Galloway.

[Sidenote: Earldom of Caithness.]

Ten years after this he took advantage of the slaughter of the bishop of
Caithness by the Norwegian earl of Orkney and Caithness, to extend his
power over that district likewise, and to reduce its earl to submission.
Harald, the earl at this time, was not a very distant relation of the
king by paternal descent, being the son of Madach, earl of Atholl, whose
father was a brother of Malcolm the Third, but he inherited the earldom
of Orkney to which Caithness at this time was attached, through his
mother, Margaret, the daughter of a previous earl, of Norwegian descent,
and he had married a daughter of Malcolm MacHeth, the so-called earl of
Moray, and was thus associated with that family in their opposition to
the Crown. The result of two separate invasions of Caithness by the
royal army was, that Caithness, north of the great range called the Ord
of Caithness, was eventually restored to Earl Harald, to be held by him
on payment to the Crown of a large sum of money; while the district
south of that range, which has the Norwegian name of Sudrland or
Sutherland, was retained by the king, and bestowed upon Hugo, a scion of
the house of De Moravia, as a lordship, and eventually made an earldom
in the person of his son William. Before the death of William one of the
old Celtic earldoms had passed by succession into the hands of a foreign
baron, for William Cumyn, the head of the Norman house of that name,
became possessed of the earldom of Buchan by his marriage with Marjory,
daughter of Fergus, the last of the Celtic earls.

[Sidenote: Seven Earls in the reign of Alexander the Second.]

Alexander the Second, the successor of William, followed out the same
policy, but during his reign, notwithstanding the increase in the number
of the earldoms, and the feudalisation of some of the older ones, we
find the seven earls of Scotland frequently making their appearance,
apparently as a constitutional body whose privileges were recognised.
They first appear as taking an important part in the coronation of
Alexander as king of Scotland, and then consisted of the earls of Fife,
Stratherne, Atholl, Angus, Menteath, Buchan, and Lothian.[84] With the
exception of Menteath, which was a more recent earldom, these are the
same earldoms whose earls gave their consent to the foundation charter
of Scone; but Menteath comes now in place of Mar, perhaps owing to the
controversy as to the rightful possessor of the latter earldom, and
Buchan was, as we have seen, now held by a Norman baron.

Another of these ancient earldoms, however, soon after terminated in the
male line, and this raised a question which throws some light upon their
character and relation to the law of feudal tenures. When Fergus, the
last of the old Celtic earls of Buchan, died in the end of King
William’s reign, there seems to have been no doubt that the earldom
devolved upon his daughter Marjory, which she carried to her husband,
William Cumyn; but when Henry, the last of the old Earls of Atholl,
died, soon after the accession of Alexander the Second, his heirs were
two sisters, Isabella and Forflissa, and the question at once arose
whether the earldom was partible between them, as was the case with any
feudal barony, or whether it devolved in its entirety upon the elder
sister, Isabella, who had married Thomas of Galloway, brother of Alan,
Lord of Galloway. This question, and the decision of the _Curia regis_
or royal court, consisting of the tenants in chief of the Crown, are
incidentally mentioned when the same discussion took place before Edward
the First between three of the competitors for the crown on the death of
the Maid of Norway. These were John Baliol, who claimed as grandson of
Margaret, the eldest daughter of David, earl of Huntingdon; Robert de
Bruce, who claimed as son of his second daughter Isabella; and John de
Hastings, as grandson of Ada, the youngest daughter. The competition for
the crown came eventually to be between Baliol, who claimed as
representing Earl David through his eldest daughter, and Bruce, who
asserted that being his grandson he was one step nearer, and should be
preferred to his great-grandson, notwithstanding that he was thus
connected through the second daughter. John de Hastings, who, like
Baliol, stood only in the relation of great-grandson, admitted the right
of the latter to the throne, if the kingdom was maintained in its
entirety, but asserted that being held under the English Crown, it was
partible like any other feudal holding, and that he ought to be
preferred to one-third of the territory of the kingdom; and Robert Bruce
put in a further claim, that in the event of his right to the whole
being rejected, he was likewise entitled to one-third. His argument was
this—‘The land of Scotland, albeit it is called a kingdom, ought to be
partible, by reason that the event which has now happened to Scotland,
seeing that it is held in fee of our lord the king of England by homage,
is no other than similar to what it would have been as to an earldom or
a barony of the realm of England which had descended in such case. And
if an earldom or barony had descended to three daughters, with the issue
of them, each would have her purpart, seeing that the three daughters
represent but one heir of all the heritage of their father; so that no
advantage ought to accrue unto the eldest, or unto the issue of her,
except solely the name of the dignity, and especially of the chief
messuage.’[85] The king of England referred this question to the eighty
Scotch arbiters, who had been elected by the parties, who were asked to
decide—‘first, whether the kingdom of Scotland is partible; second,
although it be that the kingdom is not partible, whether the lands
acquired and the escheats are partible or not. The third, whether the
earldoms and the baronies of the kingdom are partible of right; and the
fourth, seeing that the kingdom is not partible, in case the right to
the kingdom falls to daughters, whether any consideration ought to be
paid to the younger ones, by reason of the equality of right which
descended to all, as though in acknowledgment of their right,’ This
discussion only bears upon our subject in so far as it affects the
position in this respect of the old earldoms, and it is unnecessary to
refer to the answers of the arbiters, except to the third and fourth
questions. ‘To the third they say that an earldom in the kingdom of
Scotland is not partible; and this was found by judgment in the Court of
the king of Scotland as to the earldom of Astheles, or Atholl; but as to
baronies, they say that they are partible. To the fourth they say that
as to a kingdom they never saw the like; but if an earldom falls to
daughters in Scotland, the eldest takes it wholly. But if either of the
other sisters has not been provided for, in the life of the father, it
is proper that the eldest, who takes the inheritance, makes her a
payment and assignment. And this is of grace, not of right.’[86]

They thus adopt the argument of Robert the Bruce as to baronies but not
as to earldoms. It is, however, unlikely that the eighty arbiters, forty
of whom were named by Baliol and forty by Bruce, should have been
unanimous in rejecting the claim of the latter; and the qualification
contained in the fourth answer has much the appearance of a compromise
between two conflicting views, and like most compromises is inconsistent
with the grounds upon which either must be based. In point of fact both
views had a substance of truth in them. So far as the old Celtic
earldoms of the kingdom were concerned, the arbiters pronounced a
correct judgment, for such earldoms were rather official and personal
than territorial dignities, and the territory of the earldom, which
afterwards formed its demesne, was more of the nature of mensal land
appropriated to the support of the dignity. The decision, founded on as
having been given by the court of the king, that the earldom of Atholl
was not partible, must have reference to that time when the last Celtic
earl was represented by two co-heirs, and it appears to have been viewed
as being governed by Celtic and not by feudal law. Hence the eldest
sister, Isabella, was held to have right to the whole earldom.[87]
Isabella married Thomas de Galloway, brother of Alan, Lord of Galloway,
by whom she had a son, Patrick; and after her first husband’s death, in
1232, Alan de Lundin, the Hostiarius or Doorward, and one of the most
powerful barons of the time, appears as earl of Atholl, from which we
may infer that he had married the widow, and held the title during her
life. Patrick, the young earl, was, on his accession, miserably burnt to
death at Haddington in the year 1242, and then we are told the earldom
passed to his aunt Forflissa, who had married David de Hastings, a
Norman baron.[88]

While the succession to the earldom of Atholl thus shows the light in
which the ancient Celtic earldoms were regarded, and the position they
occupied in the eye of the common law of the land, those which had been
either feudalised or created by the districts being erected into
earldoms by the Crown, were in no different position from an ordinary
barony, and were regulated by the feudal law, which was correctly laid
down by Bruce, the lands being partible between co-heirs, but the
dignity and the chief messuage belonging to the eldest co-heir. Of the
former we have an example in the earldom of Caithness, which had become
feudalised after the war between William the Lion and Harald, who,
though of Scottish descent, had inherited through a Norwegian mother. On
the death of John, earl of Caithness, the last of this line, in 1231,
the title of earl passed with only one half of the lands of the earldom
to Magnus, a son of the earl of Angus, while we find the other half of
the earldom in the possession of the family of De Moravia, and on the
death of the last earl of the Angus line this half was again divided,
and Malise, earl of Stratherne, became earl of Caithness, possessing,
however, one-fourth only of the lands of the earldom.[89] In the same
manner, when the earldom of Buchan, which had passed by marriage into
the hands of the Norman family of Cumyn, was forfeited to the Crown, and
the last earl was represented by two co-heirs, one-half of the lands of
the earldom was given by King Robert Bruce to Sir John de Ross, son of
the earl of Ross, who had married the younger daughter; and the other
half, with the title of earl, was afterwards conferred upon Sir
Alexander Stuart, second son of King Robert II.

Of the additional earldoms which had been created by the Crown and added
to the older earldom, the earliest, that of Menteath, affords an
example. This earldom, like that of Buchan, had passed by marriage into
the hands of a Cumyn, and Walter Cumyn is termed Earl of Menteath as
early as the year 1255. On his death in 1257 his widow married John
Russell, an unknown Englishman, and the nobles of Scotland, irritated at
this, accused her of the murder of her former husband, and imprisoned
both her and her second husband. Walter Stewart then claimed the earldom
in right of his wife, and by the favour of the nobles obtained it. On
the death of the first Countess her right passed to William Cumyn, who
had married her daughter, and a controversy arose between him and Walter
Stewart, which terminated in the title being confirmed to the latter,
with one half of the earldom, while the other half was erected into a
barony in favour of William Cumyn. The partition at a later period of
the earldom of Lennox, another of these created earldoms, likewise
affords an example.

Such being the distinction between the old Celtic earldoms represented
by the seven earls and those subsequently constituted, we learn also
from the discussions which took place in the competition for the crown
somewhat of the rights which they claimed as their privilege; for among
the documents still preserved connected with the competition is an
appeal on behalf of the seven earls of the kingdom of Scotland to Edward
I., in which it is stated that, ‘according to the ancient laws and usage
of the kingdom of Scotland, and from the time whereof the memory of man
was not to the contrary, it appertained to the rights and liberties of
the seven earls of Scotland and the “communitas” of the same realm,
whenever the royal throne should become vacant _de facto et de jure_, to
constitute the king, and to place him in such royal seat, and to confer
upon him all the honours belonging to the government of the kingdom of
Scotland.’[90] And this function we find them evidently performing at
the coronation of Alexander the Second.

[Sidenote: Province of Argyll.]

The only one of the seven provinces which was required to be brought
into more direct connection with the Crown was the great district of
_Arregaithel_ or Argyll, and early in his reign Alexander annexed the
northern part to the earldom of Ross, and placed that earldom in
possession of a devoted adherent of his person. The district forming
what was then called North Argyll consisted in a great measure of the
territory of the old and powerful Celtic monastery of Apercrossan, and
had passed into the hands of a family of hereditary lay abbots, who
termed themselves _Sagarts_ or priests of Applecross; and Ferquard
Macintaggart, or the son of the _Sagart_ or priest who had aided the
young king in suppressing an insurrection of the Gaelic people of Moray
and Ross in support of the pretensions of the MacWilliam and MacHeth
families in the early part of his reign, was now created Earl of Ross,
which thus became a feudal earldom held of the Crown, by a family who
were among its most loyal supporters.[91] The insurrection which took
place a few years after in favour of Gillespic mac Eochagan, also of the
family of MacWilliam, led to the rest of this great district being
subdued and brought into the same relation with the Crown. The king, we
are told by Fordun, led an army into Argyll. The men of Argyll were
frightened. Some gave hostages and a great deal of money, and were taken
back in peace, while others, who had more offended against the king’s
will, forsook their estates and possessions and fled. But our lord the
king bestowed both the land and the goods of these men upon his own
followers ‘at will’; or, as Wyntoun expresses it—

                 ‘And athe tuk off thare fewté
                 Wyth thare serwys and thare homage,
                 That off hym wald hald thare herytage;
                 Bot the eshchetys off the lave
                 To the lordys off that land he gave.’

Those who fled appear to have taken refuge in Galloway, as we find
Gilescop Macihacain witnessing a charter in Galloway with a cluster of
Gaelic names along with him;[92] and as one of these names can be
connected with the district of Lochaber, while the family of that
Roderic who joined with him in his rebellion appear to have had their
main possessions in the district of Garmoran, extending from
Ardnamurchan to Glenelg, the main seat of the rebellion appears to have
been that central portion of the great region of Argyll which was said
to pertain to Moravia or Moray, of which these districts formed a part.
The native lords of this district were apparently those whom the king
dispossessed, and whose possessions he gave to his own followers, and
accordingly we find Lochaber soon after in the possession of the Cumyns.
In South Argyll, on the other hand, the native lords appear to have
submitted to the king, as the family of Dubhgal, the eldest son of
Somerled, the great Celtic Lord of Argyll, seem to have remained in
possession of the extensive district of Lorn; and it is at this time
that we may fairly place a grant which appears to have been made of the
lands in the interior which afterwards formed the lordship of Lochow to
Duncan Mac Duine, the ancestor of the Campbells, a clan the head of
which appears in the following reign as a close adherent of the
Crown.[93]

The seven earls of Scotland appear again as a body taking part in
important transactions on two different occasions in this reign. In the
first, which was the agreement between the kings of England and
Scotland, by which a settlement of the claims of the latter was
concluded in 1237, the seven earls among others became bound by oath to
maintain the agreement. These were the earls of Dunbar, of Stratherne,
of Lennox, of Angus, of Mar, of Atholl, and of Ross; and here we find
the earls of Lennox, of Mar, and of Ross, coming in place of those of
Fife, Menteath, and Buchan; but when the agreement was renewed seven
years afterwards, in 1244, the seven earls who became bound that King
Alexander would observe good faith were, Patrick Earl of Dunbar, Malcolm
Earl of Fife, Malise Earl of Stratherne, Walter Cumyn Earl of Menteath,
William Earl of Mar, Alexander (younger) Earl of Buchan, and David de
Hastings Earl of Atholl;[94] the Earls of Fife, Menteath, and Buchan
again appearing among them, and those of Lennox, Angus, and Ross being
omitted. We thus see that though the number of seven was always
retained, the constituent members were not always the same, the latter
being probably regulated by the respective positions of the earldom at
the time, for in 1237 the earldom of Angus had passed by marriage into
possession of one of the powerful family of Cumyn, but he had died in
1242, and the Countess of Angus had in 1243 replaced him with a Norman
Baron, Gilbert de Umphraville, whom she took as her second husband.

[Sidenote: Seven Earls in the reign of Alexander the Third.]

In the elaborate and picturesque account which Fordun gives us of the
coronation of Alexander the Third when a boy of eight years old, he does
not give the seven earls, as a body, a part in the ceremonial, but
simply says that the royal boy was accompanied by a number of earls,
barons, and knights. The only earls he mentions by name are Walter Cumyn
Earl of Menteath, Malcolm Earl of Fife, and Malise Earl of Stratherne;
but it is probable that in a coronation in which the Celtic element
loomed so largely, he did not intend to imply that this body did not
play the same part which they did in the coronation of his father; and
this we may reasonably infer, for he tells that in the second year of
his reign a solemn ceremony took place at Dunfermline, when, in the
presence of bishops and abbots, earls and barons, and other good men
both clerics and laymen, the relics of Saint Margaret were enshrined at
Dunfermline. The record of this transaction in the Chartulary of
Dunfermline bears that it was done in presence of the seven bishops and
seven earls of Scotland.[95] It is obvious, however, that this body of
the seven earls were gradually losing their separate corporate
existence, and were no longer able to maintain in this reign the
functions they exercised in previous reigns; for when the succession to
the throne was settled upon the daughter of Alexander in 1284, we find
them merged in the general ‘communitas,’ or feudal community of the
kingdom, in which the entire body of the earls, now amounting to
thirteen, appear. They take a part, but apparently not an influential
one, in the discussions that took place after the death of the Maid of
Norway between the competitors for the crown; and probably the last
attempt they made to repossess themselves of the important position they
formerly occupied in the affairs of the kingdom was when in 1297 they,
in conjunction with John Comyn of Badenoch, invaded England at the head
of a powerful army which met in Annandale and besieged Carlisle. The
seven earls engaged in this expedition were the earls of Buchan,
Menteath, Stratherne, Lennox, Ross, Atholl, and Mar;[96] but the attempt
resulted disastrously for them, for they were obliged to raise the siege
and return to Scotland; and then again assembling at Roxburgh they made
a second raid into the eastern part of England as far as the priory of
Hexham, which they destroyed, and returned with a great booty to
Scotland. They then besieged and took the castle of Dunbar, the earl of
Dunbar having submitted to the king of England, but being besieged by
the English in their turn the castle was taken, and three of the earls,
viz., those of Menteath, Atholl, and Ross, were taken prisoners, with
John Comyn and five other barons, with twenty-nine knights, two clerics,
and eighty-three esquires, and confined in different castles in
England.[97]

After this we hear no more of the seven earls of Scotland. As a
constitutional body possessing, or claiming to possess, separate
privileges, they are merged in the general ‘Communitas regni,’ or
Estates of the kingdom, the feudal ‘Curia regis’ consisting of all who
held lands in chief of the Crown. As we have seen, when the succession
to the Crown was settled towards the end of the reign of Alexander the
Third, they take no part as a separate body, but are merged in the
general assembly of the feudal baronage of the kingdom, consisting of
thirteen earls and twenty-four barons, and six years afterwards there is
a still fuller representation of the Estates of the kingdom, when a
letter is addressed to Edward the First by the Communitas regni urging
him to arrange a marriage of his son with the Maid of Norway. The body
from whom this letter proceeds consists of the two bishops of St.
Andrews and Glasgow, John Cumyn, and James, High Steward, the guardians
of the kingdom; ten diocesan bishops; twelve of the thirteen earls, the
earl of Fife being then a minor; twenty-three abbots of monasteries,
eleven priors, and forty-eight barons holding of the Crown.[98] Neither
do they appear as a separate body in the great national protest
addressed by the Communitas regni to the Pope in 1320, and signed on
their behalf by eight of the earls and twenty-eight of the barons.[99]

[Sidenote: State of the land in the reign of Alexander the Third.]

The state, then, of the land, as thus exhibited to us in the reign of
Alexander the Third, appears to have been this.—A large portion of the
territory of the kingdom was now held in chief of the Crown by barons,
very few of whom were of Celtic descent, on the feudal tenure of
military service. Another portion of the territory formed the domain of
the Crown. A third portion formed the territory possessed by the old
earls of Scotland, and presented, in miniature, the same characteristics
as the Crown land, being partly held of the earls by the vassals of the
earldom, and partly forming his domain; and a very large extent of
territory, probably not less than a third of the whole land, belonged to
the Church, and formed the possessions either of the bishoprics, or of
the great monasteries which had been founded by the kings of this
dynasty, while the lands which had formed the territory of the old
Celtic monasteries and had become secularised, now appear either in the
possession of the Crown or of the monasteries under the name of
‘abthaniæ’ or abthainries.

In that part of Scotland which still retained, in the main, a Celtic
population, we may expect to find the Celtic tenures still prevailing to
a large extent, and still exhibiting many of their peculiar
characteristics; but where the population had become in a large measure
Teutonic, and where so much of the land was now held on feudal tenures
by the great barons of the Crown, and by the Roman monastic orders, and
where so many of the earldoms had passed by marriage into Norman
families, it is more difficult to discover the traces of a Celtic
occupation, and the peculiarities of the Celtic tenures under the feudal
forms which shrouded them from observation. These we can only expect to
find on that portion of land which formed the proper demesne of the
Crown and of the old earls, and had been retained in their own
possessions without the interposition of any feudal vassals between them
and the actual occupiers of the soil.

[Sidenote: The Crown demesne.]

Of the mode in which the demesne land of the Crown was actually
possessed, we have fortunately a very distinct account given to us by
the old chronicler, John of Fordun. He refers it back to the period of
Malcolm the Second, to whom nine spurious laws have been attributed, and
supposes it to have originated with him; but this may be regarded as a
mere theory, framed on the basis of the spurious history of Scotland, to
account for a state of matters which existed in his own day, and we have
only to separate the mythic part of his statement from what is obviously
the result of his own observation. He tells us that ‘histories relate
the aforesaid Malcolm to have been so open-handed, or rather prodigal,
that while, according to ancient custom, he held as his own property all
the lands, districts, and provinces of the whole kingdom, he kept
nothing thereof in his possession but the Moothill of the royal seat of
Scone, where the kings, sitting in their royal robes on the throne, are
wont to give out judgments, laws, and statutes to their subjects. Of
old, indeed, the kings were accustomed to grant to their soldiers in
feu-farm more or less of their own lands, a portion of any province, or
a thanage; for at that time almost the whole kingdom was divided into
thanages. Of these he granted to each one as much as he pleased, either
on lease by the year as tillers of the ground, or for ten or twenty
years, or in liferent, with remainder to one or two heirs, as free and
kindly tenants, and to some likewise, though few, in perpetuity, as
knights, thanes, and chiefs, not however so freely, but that each of
them paid a certain annual feu-duty to their lord the king,’[100]

The first or mythic part of this statement corresponds with the spurious
laws of Malcolm the Second, which thus commence—‘1. King Malcolme gave
and distributed all his lands of the realm of Scotland amongst his men;
2. and reserved nathing in propertie to himselfe but the Royale dignitie
and the Mute hill in the town of Scone,’[101] and may be disregarded as
belonging to the spurious history of Scotland. Whether there ever was a
time when it could be said that the king possessed nothing but the
Moothill of Scone, and in what sense it could be said that the whole
kingdom was divided into thanages, and that the whole lands of the
kingdom once belonged to the Crown, is a question that must be
determined in the course of this inquiry; but when the old chronicler
tells us by what class of persons the Crown lands were actually
possessed, and by what species of tenure they held them, he is dealing
with matters which still existed in his own day, and the characteristics
of which he had every means of ascertaining if they were not perfectly
familiar to him, and he gives us a very distinct account of them. He
discriminates between three classes of persons as possessing these
lands. The lowest class were the _agricolæ_ or husbandmen, the actual
cultivators of the soil, who were regarded as yearly tenants, and are,
no doubt, the same class with those who are termed _bondi_ and _nativi_
in feudal charters. They were, in the eastern districts, the remains of
the old Celtic population. The class next above them consisted of the
_liberi_ and _generosi_, who held land either on lease for ten or twenty
years, or in liferent renewable for one or two lives. The former were
probably equivalent to the _liberi firmarii_ or free farmers, and the
latter to the Rentallers or kindly tenants of the feudal holdings. The
third class, who held directly of the Crown, were either _milites_ or
knights, who held a knight’s fee for military service, or _thani_, who
held a thanage, or _principes_ or magnates. And he defines a thanage to
be a portion of the land of a province held _ad feodofirmam_,[102] or in
feu-farm, the holder of which was subject in payment of an annual
‘census’ or feu-duty. By the _principes_, he probably refers either to
the Mormaers or Earls of the old Celtic earldoms, or to the position of
the great Celtic vassals in the western districts as chiefs of
clans.[103] Fordun was himself connected with the northern counties of
Kincardine and Aberdeen, where the older holdings of the thanage still
maintained their position in the greatest degree even to his own day. He
was a chaplain in the diocese of Aberdeen, and the Chartulary of that
bishopric has preserved to us a rental of the Crown lands in the reign
of Alexander the Third, which shows their extent and the nature of the
holdings. In this rental we find the lands of Aberdeen, Belhelvy,
Kintore, Fermartyn, Obyne, Glendowachy, Boyn, Munbre, and Natherdale,
which are termed thanages; Convalt, which is termed a ‘dominium’ or
lordship; Lydgat, Uchterless, and Rothymay, called baronies; and other
lands which have no particular designation, with the towns of Aberdeen,
Cullen, and Banff.[104] We also learn that the upper part of the vales
of the rivers Dee and Don formed the domain of the earldom of Mar, which
consisted of the districts of Braemar, Strathdee, Cromar, and Strathdon,
while an extensive territory on the Dee, which had formerly belonged to
the earldom, was held in the reign of Alexander the Third by one of his
most powerful feudal vassals, Alan the Doorward, to whose father it had
been given as a compensation for a claim he had to the earldom of Mar;
but though we do not find any of the lands of this earldom bearing the
name of thanages, this denomination was still retained in the demesne of
two of the more westerly earldoms. In Atholl we have the thanages of
Glentilt, Crannich, Achmore, Candknock, while the great abthanrie of
Dull belonged to the Crown; and in Stratherne we find the thanages of
Strum and Dunning held under the earls, and that of Forteviot with the
abthanrie of Madderdyn or Madderty in the Crown.

While in the eastern districts we find the older holdings which survived
from the Celtic period though disguised under a Saxon nomenclature,
which owes its origin probably to the reigns of Edgar and Alexander the
First, explained in language more appropriate to feudal holdings, when
we pass over to the western districts which still possessed a Celtic
population where the Saxon terminology has not penetrated, we come in
contact at once with the realities of the Celtic tribal system which the
adoption of feudal forms little affected, and whose customs are
therefore less disguised by feudal forms, while the relation of the
different classes to each other, though nominally feudal, are
practically tribal. Although, when the great district of Argyll was
annexed to the Crown and other insurrections among the Gaelic tribes
were repressed, grants of land were, to some extent, given to Norman
barons, with a view to the more effectual suppression of the unruly
inhabitants, they conveyed little beyond a bare feudal superiority and
introduced no foreign resident element, and thus hardly influenced the
Celtic tribes who remained the actual holders of the soil; and when, by
the cession of the Isles in the reign of Alexander the Third, the
Norwegian dominion over them was transferred to Scotland, we find that
the great Celtic lords of the Southern Isles, who had held them as kings
under the Norwegian Crown, retained the same position under the Scottish
king. At the great meeting of the Community of Scotland, which settled
the succession of the Crown in 1283, we see the heads of three great
families descended from Somerled—viz. Alexander de Ergadia, Angus, son
of Dovenald, and Alan, son of Rotheric—appearing among them, the first
being the powerful Lord of Lorn, and the second the Lord of the Isles,
while the third owned large territories both on the mainland and in the
Isles.

[Sidenote: District of Argyll divided into sheriffdoms.]

One of the first acts of John Baliol, when his claim to the throne was
preferred, was to assimilate the district of Argyll and the kingdom of
the Isles to the system which prevailed in the rest of the kingdom,
which was divided into sheriffdoms, in which the king was represented by
the vicecomes or sheriff, and the Act of Parliament by which this was
done will show how the land in these western regions was then held
within eight years of the death of Alexander the Third.[105] By this
Act, which was passed in 1292, the sheriffdom of Skye was to consist of
the lands of the earls of Ross in North Argail, that is, the western
part of the present county of Ross, the lands of Glenelg, the Crown
lands of Skye and Lewis (here the principal lords were the Macleods of
Harris and Lewis though they are not named), the lands of Garmoran, with
the islands of Egg and Rume (this had been the chief seat of the Lords
of the Isles descended from Roderic, son of Reginald), and the islands
of Uist and Barra, where the MacNeills were the principal possessors.
The sheriffship of Lorn was to consist of the lands of Ardnamurchan and
Kinnelbathyn or Morvern; the lands of Alexander de Ergadia, Lord of
Lorn; of John de Glenurchy, of Gilbert M‘Naughton, of Malcolm MacIvor,
of Dugald of Craignish, of John, son of Gilchrist of Radulph of Dundee,
who was a Scrymgeour, whose ancestor had received a grant of Glassrie
from Alexander the Second; of Gillespie M‘Lachlan, of the earl of
Menteath who had a right to Knapdale, of Anegus, son of Dovenald the
Lord of the Isles, and of Colin Campbell, Lord of Lochow; and the
sheriffdom of Kintyre was to consist, besides the possessors of the
district of Kintyre, of the lands of the Lamonts, of Thomas Cambel, and
of Dunkan Duff, in Cowall, and of the island of Bute.




                              CHAPTER III.

                           LEGENDARY ORIGINS.


[Sidenote: The problem to be solved.]

The occupation of the lands which formed the territory of the kingdom of
Scotland in the reign of Alexander the Third, the mutual relation of the
different races by which it was held, the connection of the Celtic
portion of the population with the soil, the tenure by which they
possessed it, and the different classes in their social organisation
which it discloses, present to us the problem which we have to solve,
and we have now to trace the history of the early institutions from
which its phenomena were derived, and the extent to which they have been
affected by internal change or by external influence.

[Sidenote: Early traditions.]

But before entering upon this inquiry it may be well to see what legend
or tradition tells us with regard to the Celtic portion of the
population, with which we have now mainly to do. Such legends or
traditions are either intended as a means of conveying some early facts
in the history of the race in a popular form, or of clothing some truths
in a symbolic dress, or they are merely the picturesque imaginations of
their early sennachies or native historians. Those which relate to the
Celtic population of Scotland are derived from two different sources.
They are either Welsh or Irish, that is, they are the legends of either
the Cymric or the Gaelic race, and in estimating their relative value it
is necessary to take their probable origin and character into account.
Some of them are what may be termed ethnic legends. They are designed to
perpetuate the popular conception of the origin and early settlements of
the race, but they are the creation of a period when there had been some
progress in the culture of the people, and when they possessed a rude
literature derived in the main from the spread of Christianity and the
establishment of Christian institutions among them. Their authors felt
the necessity of connecting the early history of the country with the
events of Biblical or Classical history, and it assumed the shape of a
fictitious narrative which belongs to the mythic period of their annals.
Others again may be called linguistic legends, and were rude attempts to
account for peoples nominally distinct, and from pride of race regarding
each other as independent races, possessing the same language and using
a cognate form of speech. Others were what may be truly called
historical legends, and handed down in a more or less modified shape
events which we have reason to think actually took place; while others
again were purely artificial, and were simply the rude and fantastic
creations of the popular mind, which felt the necessity of filling up
the dark period of the annals of their race with imaginary events
calculated to gratify their national feeling and their natural love of
the marvellous.

[Sidenote: Ethnic legends.]

The ethnic legends invariably connect the origin of the people with
Biblical or Classical history, and assumes that some of the races which
formed the oldest population of the country, and were really indigenous,
had immigrated from some foreign land. We find it assuming two different
shapes. In the one the different nations constituting the early
population were separate colonies which proceeded from foreign countries
and entered the land at different periods. Thus Bede tells us of the
early population of Britain that it was first peopled by a colony of
‘Brittones’ who came from Armorica; that then the Picts came from
Scythia, and the nation of the Scots came from Ireland; and he places
these successive colonies prior to the Roman invasion of Britain. The
legendary history of Ireland presents the early history of its
population in the same aspect. The account of the successive colonies
which occupied Ireland is supposed to have been narrated to Saint
Patrick by her earliest historian Fintan, who lived before the Flood,
and remained alive during the whole of the centuries which elapsed till
the introduction of Christianity. The Book of Ballimote contains a poem
supposed to have been written by him. If he was a real personage, he may
have been Fintan Munnu, a celebrated Irish saint who died on 25th
October 634, but the poem is no doubt a later composition, and a
translation is here inserted as giving in short compass these successive
peoplings of the island, and as a good specimen of their early legends.

As the learned historian has related, namely Fintan:—

                              1.

           ‘Should any one inquire of me about Eire,
           I can tell most accurately
           Respecting every invasion which took place
           From the beginning of all pleasing life.

                              2.

           ‘Ceasair set out from the East,
           The woman who was daughter of Beatha,
           Accompanied by fifty daughters,
           As also by three men.

                              3.

           ‘The deluge came on.
           Bith resided at his mountain without secrecy,
           Ladra at Ard Ladran,
           And Ceasair at her corner.

                              4.

           ‘As to me, I remained a year under the flood
           At Tul Tinnde of strength.
           There had not been slept, nor will there be slept,
           A sleep better than that which I had.

                              5.

           ‘I was then in Ireland;
           Pleasant was my condition
           When Partholon arrived
           From the Grecian country in the East.

                              6.

           ‘I was also in Ireland
           While it was uninhabited,
           Until the son of Agnoman arrived,
           Neimead of pleasant manners.

                              7

           ‘Fir Bolg and Fir Gaillian
           Arrived a long period afterwards.
           The Fir Domnan then arrived,
           And landed in Irrus westward.

                              8.

           ‘After them the Tuatha De arrived
           Concealed in their dark clouds
           I ate my food with them,
           Though at such a remote period.

                              9.

           ‘Then came the sons of Milead
           From Spain southward.
           I lived and ate with them,
           Though fierce were their battles.

                             10.

           ‘A continuity of life
           Still remained with me,
           For in my time Christianity was here established
           By the king of heaven of the clouds.’

The history of these successive colonies is elaborated with many details
in the fictitious history of Ireland during the mythic period, but it is
unnecessary for our purpose to enter into these details except in so far
as they bear upon the legendary history of the people of Scotland.[106]

Another form of the ethnic legend is one common to the early history of
all countries during the mythic period. In it the race is personified in
an _eponymus_ who is the supposed ancestor and founder of it, and their
supposed settlement in the country in which they are first found is
prefigured in a marriage with a female whose name has an obvious
relation to it, and thus an ethnic family is produced, the sons of which
usually represent the territorial divisions of the country. This family
has therefore a territorial as well as an ethnic meaning, and the
filiation does not always imply affinity of race, but may indicate no
more than the joint occupation of the country by the different tribes
personified in the members of the ethnic family. We have an instance of
this form of the legend in the well-known fable contained in Geoffrey of
Monmouth’s fabulous history, where Brutus, the _eponymus_ of the
Britons, appears as the first colonist in the island, and has three
sons, Locrinus, Camber, and Albanactus, representing the Lloegry of
England, the Cymry of Wales, and the people of Alban or Scotland, as
well as in the older form of the legend, where Brutus and Albanus are
brothers. In the Irish form Gathelus or _Gaidelglas_, the _eponymus_ of
the Gael, marries Scota the daughter of Pharaoh, by which the settlement
of the Gael in Scotia or Ireland is prefigured, and his period is
brought back so as to connect his history and that of his race with the
Biblical narrative. His descendant Milesius, son of Bile, son of
Breogan, is also said to have married Scota, daughter of Pharaoh, and
actually settles the race in Ireland. We find, however, this feature of
the legend, which represents the territorial divisions of the country by
the sons of the supposed colonist, running through the whole of the
first form of the legend. Thus Partholan, the first colonist after the
flood, arrives with three sons, Rughruidhe, Slainge, and Laighlinne, and
after their death he divides Ireland between four sons, Er, Orba,
Fearann, and Feargna. The second colonist, Nemead, has a wife, Macha,
from whom Ardmacha or Armagh takes its name, thus signifying the
principal seat of the race; and he has three sons, Iarbheineoil, Fergus
Leithdearg, and Starn, and Ireland is divided into three parts between
Beothach son of Iarbheineoil, Briotan son of Fergus Leithdearg, and
Simon son of Beoain son of Starn. The people of Nemead are then driven
out of Ireland by the Fomoraigh or sea pirates, and depart in three
bodies. One under Beothach goes to the north of Europe, another under
Briotan to the north of Britain, and the third under Simon to Greece.
The third colonists, the Firbolg, come from Greece under Dela, a
descendant of Simon, and by him Ireland is divided into five districts
between his five sons, Slainge, Gann, Seangan, Geannan, and Rughruidhe;
and these were the five provinces of Ireland—Leinster, possessed by
Slainge; Thomond and Desmond, the two divisions of Munster, by Gann and
Seangan; Connaught by Geannan, and Ulster by Rughruidhe. Here we have a
reproduction of two of the sons of Partholan in Slainge and Rughruidhe.
We have again a threefold division of Ireland under the fourth
colonists, the Tuatha De, supposed to be the descendants of Beothach,
son of Iarbheineoil; and the three sons of Cearmadha Milbeoil their
king—MacCuil, MacCeacht, and MacGreine—have three queens, Eire, Fodla,
and Banba, which are simply the three oldest names in Ireland. Milesius
too has three sons, Eber, Heremon, and Ir, of whom the former possessed
the two Munsters, Heremon Leinster and Connaught, and Ir Ulster; and
here again we find the same reproduction of previous names, for Eber has
the same four sons, Er, Orba, Fearann, and Feargna,[107] who are
attributed to Partholan, and the descendants of Ir who occupied Ulster
were termed the race of Rughruidhe from a descendant of that name. We
also find that this filiation from the same parents does not imply
identity of race, for the descendants of Ir, to whom the name of
Rughruidhe especially belongs, and who peopled the north of Ireland,
appear throughout the Irish Annals under the name of Cruithnigh, and
were no other than the Picts who were settled in Ireland.

[Sidenote: Linguistic legends.]

The form which the linguistic legend usually assumes is that of a colony
of soldiers obtaining wives from another people whose language they
adopt, and perhaps the most curious specimen is that told of the Britons
of Armorica by Nennius. He tells us that when Maximus, who was declared
emperor in Britain, went over to Gaul to maintain his pretensions, he
withdrew from Britain its military force, and, unwilling to send his
soldiers back to their wives, children, and possessions in Britain,
settled them in Armorica, where they became the Armorican Britons, and
some MSS. have the following addition:—These Armorican Britons, having
laid waste and depopulated the country, took the wives and daughters of
the previous inhabitants in marriage, but cut out their tongues that
their children might not learn their mother tongue. Hence they were
called _Letewiccion_ or half speech.[108] The meaning of this tale is,
that identity of language is implied by the marriage of the leaders of
one people with the wives and daughters of another, and a dialectic
difference could only be accounted for by depriving the females of the
power of speech. The story told by Bede that the Picts had no wives, and
first asked them of the Britons and were refused, and then obtained them
from the Scots, is likewise a legend, intended to account for that
people, or at least the greater portion of them, speaking a Gaelic
dialect; and in the same manner the oldest poem which narrates the
settlement of the Milesian Scots in Ireland tells us that ‘Cruithne, the
son of Cinge, took their women from them;’ and then after—

           There were no charming noble wives
           For their young men.
           Their women having been stolen, they made affinity
           With the Tuatha Dea.[109]

Here we have the same story of the Picts, as personified in their
_eponymus_ Cruithne taking their wives from the Milesians, and the
latter replacing them by wives taken from the previous inhabitants of
the Tuath De. The meaning is obviously linguistic, and such legends are
intended simply to express a community of language between the supposed
military colonies and the people from whom they obtained their wives.

[Sidenote: Historical legends.]

Some of these legends have, however, a historical basis, such as those
which relate to supposed settlements of the race of the Scots in
Britain. These contain an element of truth, in so far as temporary
settlements of the Scots took place in Britain in the fourth century,
when they first appear in history, and joined the Picts, Saxons, and
Attacotti in assailing the Roman province in Britain; and still more
when a permanent settlement of the Scots on the west coast north of the
Firth of Clyde undoubtedly took place in the beginning of the sixth
century, and the small Scottish kingdom of Dalriada was formed.

[Sidenote: Artificial character of early Irish history.]

Others of these legends, however, are undoubtedly purely artificial, and
the entire legendary history of Ireland prior to the establishment of
Christianity in the fifth century partakes largely of this character. It
presents us with a minute detail of the colonies supposed to have
preceded the settlement of the Scots, with the names and families of
their leaders, the exact period, even to the day of the week, of their
settlement, the duration of their occupation of the country, the
succession of their kings, and the history of the extinction of the
colony either by pestilence or expatriation. Then we have the reigns of
116 pagan kings of the Scots, who reigned during twenty-one centuries,
given with an extraordinary minuteness and elaboration of detail, and
the accompaniment of marvellous incidents, which betrays its legendary
character. Ethnic and linguistic legends are of course interwoven in it,
and it may contain fragments of history, such as the revolt of the
_Attachtuatha_ or servile classes against their lords, and the
territorial changes in the divisions of the land and the location of the
tribes which took place from time to time; but the marvellous character
of the events continues to the establishment of Christianity, as we see
in the narrative of the reigns of three last pagan kings, the first of
whom, Niall, who reigned from 379 to 405, subjected all Britain and a
great part of the Continent to his sway, and received hostages from nine
kingdoms, whence he was called Niall of the nine Hostages; Dathy, who
was killed by a flash of lightning at the foot of the Alps in the year
428; and Laogaire, who was slain by the elements between two mountains
called Erin and Alban for refusing obedience to the mission of St.
Patrick. The chronology of this legendary history, too, is entirely
artificial, and though some parts of the narrative may have a historic
basis, the dates assigned to them are as little to be trusted as the
rest of the history itself. One of the tales contained in the Book of
Ballimote, by which the knowledge of this wonderful history was supposed
to have been preserved to historic times, will furnish a good example of
what the imagination of its framers was capable of producing, and it has
an interest for us from the connection it had with the great apostle of
Scotland, as that of Fintan had with the apostle of Ireland. We are
there told that the entire colony of Partholon’s people were destroyed
by the plague, excepting one man, Tuan the son of Starn, the son of
Seara, Partholon’s brother’s son, and God metamorphosed him into various
forms, so that he lived from the time of Partholon to that of
Columcille, to whom he related all the information, history, and
conquests of Ireland that took place from Ceasair’s time to that period,
and then we have the following poem:—

                              1.

             Tuan, son of Cairill, as we are told,
             Was freed from sin by Jesus;
             One hundred years complete he lived,
             He lived in blooming manhood.

                              2.

             Three hundred years in the shape of a wild ox
             He lived on the open extensive plains;
             Two hundred and five years he lived
             In the shape of a wild boar.

                              3.

             Three hundred years he was still in the flesh
             In the shape of an old bird;
             One hundred delightful years he lived
             In the shape of a salmon in the flood.

                              4.

             A fisherman caught him in his net,
             He brought it to the king’s palace;
             When the bright salmon was there seen,
             The queen immediately longed for it.

                              5.

             It was forthwith dressed for her,
             Which she alone ate entire;
             The beauteous queen became pregnant,
             The issue of which was Tuan.

[Sidenote: Cymric legends.]

These legends, however, though it has been thought to indicate their
real character and to inquire how far they may be supposed to embody
ethnologic and linguistic facts or to contain an element of historic
truth, in reality concern us only in so far as they tend to throw light
upon the constituent elements of the Celtic population of Scotland and
the corresponding territorial divisions of the land. So far as regards
the early Celtic peoples south of the Firths of Forth and Clyde, we must
turn in the first instance to the Cymric legends.[110] They tell us that
this population may be referred to three races, the Brython, the Romani,
and the Gwyddyl. Thus in a poem contained in the Book of Taliessin we
find them thus alluded to:—

      Three races cruel from true disposition,
      Gwyddyl and Brython and Romani,
      Create discord and confusion;
      And about the boundary of Prydain, beautiful its towns,
      There is a battle against chiefs above the mead vessels[111]

Although the word _Gwyddyl_ is in modern Welsh usually translated
_Irish_, yet there can be no doubt that it was originally used in a much
wider sense as the equivalent of the Irish word _Gaidheal_, and was
applied to the whole Gaelic race wherever located. Of this there is
ample evidence in the old Welsh poems. The Brython are, of course, the
Brettones of Bede, or rather here that part of them which occupied the
districts extending from the Derwent to the Clyde, and formed the
ancient Cumbria. In the same poem they appear under their national name
of Cymry, when it is said,

  From Penryn Wleth to Loch Reon (that is, from Glasgow to Loch Ryan),
  The Cymry are of one mind, bold heroes.

By the Romani, those leaders of the Britons are meant who were supposed
to have derived their descent from the Roman military or civil
commanders, as when Gildas tells us that the Britons ‘took arms under
Ambrosius Aurelianus as their leader, who was of the Roman nation, and
whose parents had been adorned with the purple;’[112] and Nennius, who
calls him _Embres Guletic_, says that his father was a consul of the
Roman nation.[113] We find also many of the great leaders of the Britons
termed _Guledig_, the equivalent of the Latin Imperator, and usually
expressed by the epithet Aurelius or Aurelianus; and to them no doubt
the great national hero Arthur also belonged, who, according to Nennius,
led the kings of the Britons against the Saxons as their Dux
Bellorum,[114] and whose actions, so far as they are historical, belong
to this part of Britain. Of the last two races, the Brython and the
Romani, we have an account in an old document, ‘The Descent of the Men
of the North.’[115] Here the Cymry, who occupied the northern districts,
are said to be the descendants of Coel Hen, or the aged, whose name is
preserved in the central district of Ayrshire, now termed Kyle, and of
his son, Ceneu. Their descendants appear to have consisted principally
of three tribes. They are thus noticed: ‘Three hundred swords of the
tribe of Kynvarch, and three hundred shields of Kynwydyon, and three
hundred spears of the tribe of Coel. Whatever object they entered into
deeply, that never failed.’ The leader of the tribe of Cynvarch, whose
grandfather, Gorust Ledlwm, was either son of Coel or of his son Ceneu,
was the celebrated Urien Reged, whom Nennius mentions under the name of
Urbgen as fighting against Roderic, son of Ida, the founder of the
Anglic kingdom of Bernicia, and known in the Welsh poems by the name of
Flamddwyn or the Flamebearer. This tribe appears to have occupied the
districts lying between the Northern Wall and the Forth, to which the
names of Reged and of Mureif were applied. The second tribe was that of
Kynwydyon, whose grandfather Garthwys was grandson of Ceneu. The four
sons of Kynwyt Kynwdyon are given as the leaders, two of whom are termed
Clydrud Eiddyn and Cadrod Calchvynyd, from which we may infer that this
tribe was located partly in the district extending from the Esk to the
Avon, in which Duneyddyn or Edinburgh, and Caereiddyn or Caredin, are
situated, and partly in the district of which Calchvynyd or Kelso was
the chief seat. The latter were probably the people afterwards termed
the Tevidalenses. The rest of the descendants of Coel were grouped under
the name of Coeling, and extended from the Clyde to Loch Ryan, their
principal territories being the districts of Carrawg, Coel, and Canawon,
which, under the modern form of Garrick, Kyle, and Cuningham, form the
county of Ayr.

After thus noticing the three tribes under which the supposed
descendants of Coel were ranged, the descent of the Men of the North
proceeds to give the pedigrees of those said to be of Roman descent.
They are all deduced from Dyfnwal Hen, or the aged, who, in this
document, is made the grandson of Macsen Guledig, or Maximus the Roman
Emperor, but in the genealogies annexed to Nennius is said to be the
grandson of Ceredig Guledig, whose ancestor Confer or Cynvor was the
mythic father of Constantius, the father of the Emperor Constantine.
These were obviously the Romani of the poem, and can be mainly traced in
connection with the central districts of Annandale, Clydesdale, and
Tweeddale. The principal race included among them was that of the
provincial kings of Strathclyde, descended from Rydderch Hael, who is
mentioned in Adamnan’s _Life of Saint Columba_ as reigning in Alclyde or
Dumbarton, and whose history is so intimately connected with that of
Kentigern, the great apostle of Strathclyde.[116]

To the race of the Gwyddyl or Gaidheal the old Welsh traditions
undoubtedly attach the Ffichti or Picts, to whom they invariably give
the name of Gwyddyl Ffichti.[117] They occupied the small district
extending from the Pentland or Pictland Hills to the river Carron, which
was known to the Welsh as Manau Guotodin or Gododin, and to the Irish as
the Plain of Manann, from whence they are said by Nennius to have driven
out the sons of Cunedda, from whom the kings of North Wales were
descended. They also possessed the larger district of Galloway, from the
mouth of the Nith to the Irish Sea. This district takes its name from
the term applied by the Welsh to its inhabitants, of Galwydel, from
which the Latin form of Galwethia was formed;[118] and we find the name
of Scoti Picti, which is obviously a Latin rendering of the Welsh term
Gwyddyl Ffichti, applied by the author of the _Descriptio Albaniæ_, who
was certainly a Welshman, to the Picts, who, Bede tells us, formed the
population of the western districts north of the Clyde, afterwards known
by the name of Arregaithel, before the Scots formed their settlement of
Dalriada there.

[Sidenote: Legendary origin of transmarine tribes.]

For the legendary origins of the tribes of transmarine Scotland, or the
districts north of the Forth and Clyde, we must, however, mainly look to
Irish sources, and we find them pervading nearly the whole of the mythic
history of Ireland, and cropping up here and there in the course of its
artificial chronology.

[Sidenote: The Nemedians in Scotland.]

Alban, or Scotland, is first brought into connection with these
legendary narratives of the primitive colonisation of Erin, or Ireland,
in the history of the second colony—that of the Nemedians, or sons of
Neimead. After a great battle with the sea-robbers termed the Fomoraigh,
they were defeated, and none escaped save the crew of one ship,
consisting of thirty men under three chiefs, Simon Breac, son of Starn,
son of Neimead; Iobaath, son of Beothuigh, son of Iarbhanieoil, son of
Neimead; and Briotan Maol, son of Fergus Leithdearg, son of Neimead.
They then resolve to leave Ireland, and taking seven years to prepare
for this emigration, they fit out three fleets, under their three
leaders. One fleet, under Simon Breac, goes to Thrace. A second, under
Iobaath, to the north of Europe; and the third, under Briotan Maol, to
Dobhar and Iardobhar in the north of Alban, where they dwelt with their
posterity. Now from this third colony the oldest legendary accounts
bring two of the West Highland clans. These are the Clan O’Duibhn, or
Campbells, and the Clan Leod, or MacLeods.[119] The former clan first
appear in the occupation of the central district of Dalriada encircling
the lake of Lochaw, around which lay territories of the Dalriadic tribes
of Lorn and Gabhran, and their oldest genealogies bring them from this
Briotan, son of Fergus Leithdearg. The Clan Leod emerge, after the
termination of the Norwegian kingdom of the Isles, in possession of
Lewis, Harris, and the northern districts of Skye, and they are deduced
from Laigh Laider, his brother, also a son of Fergus Leithdearg.

[Sidenote: The Firbolg and Tuath De Danan in Scotland.]

After remaining in Greece two hundred and sixteen years, the followers
of Simon Breac, the first of the three leaders of the sons of Neimead,
return to Ireland in three tribes—the Firbolg, Fir Domnan, and Fir
Gaileoin, under five brothers, who divide Ireland into five provinces.
They are in their turn conquered by the Tuatha De Danan, the descendants
of the second tribe of the Nemedians, who, after remaining a long time
in the north of Europe, where they possessed four cities—Falias, Gorias,
Finias, and Murias—pass over into the north of Alban, where they remain
seven years in the same districts of Dobhar and Iardobhar, which had
been colonised by Briotan Maol, bringing with them from Falias the Lia
Fal, or celebrated Coronation Stone; from Gorias, the sword used by
their leader; from Finias, his spear; and from Murias, the mystic
caldron of the Dagda. After remaining seven years in Alban, they go to
Ireland and conquer the Firbolg in the great battle of Magh Tuireadh;
and the few Firbolg who escaped this battle fly to the Western Isles,
and occupy Arran, Isla, Rachrain, and other islands, where they remained
till they were driven out by the Cruithnigh or Picts, and returned to
Ireland, when they were received by Cairbre Niadhfher, king of Leinster
under the Milesian Scots. Then follows the legendary settlement of the
Scots under the three sons of Milesius, Heber, Heremon, and Ir, and
their cousin Lughadh, son of Ith, before whom the mythic race of the
Tuatha De Danan gave way. The transactions between them form one of the
most picturesque of these Irish legends, the details of which need not
be given here;[120] but the Tuatha De Danan yield the plains of Erin to
the Scots, retaining only the green mounds, known by the name of Sidh,
and then being made invisible by their enchantments, became the Fir
Sidhe, or Fairies, of Ireland.

[Sidenote: Pictish legends.]

With the mythic settlement of the Milesian Scots in Ireland commence the
legends of the settlements of the Cruithnigh or Picts in Scotland; and
as Ireland was divided into five provinces between five brothers, sons
of the leader of Firbolg, and afterwards by the sons of Milesius, so we
find in the legend an early division of Alban into seven provinces
between the seven sons of Cruithne, the ‘eponymus’ of the Pictish race.
Five of these provinces can be identified. Fibh, the eldest of the seven
brothers, represents Fife; Fodla, the third, _Athfhotla_ or Atholl;
Fortrenn, corresponds with the district between the Tay and the Forth,
consisting of Stratherne and Menteath, and which, as at one time the
seat of the monarchy, gave its name to the kingdom of the Picts; Caith,
with Caithness; and Circinn, with that district which included
_Maghghirghinn_, or the plains of Circinn, a name corrupted into Moerne
or the Mearns. The remaining two, Fidach and Ce, though the names cannot
now be identified, obviously represent the intermediate districts of
Ross, Moray, Buchan, and Mar. Another form of the legend represents the
Cruithnigh or Picts coming from Ireland in the time of the sons of
Milesius, under Cruithnechan, son of Cinge, son of Lochit, to assist the
Britons of Fortrenn to fight against the Saxons, and the Britons yielded
their clans and their swordland to them, that is, _Cruithentuath_, and
they took possession of the land. The same legend assumes the form, in
connection with the Picts of Dalaradia in Ulster, from whence they came,
of twice eighteen soldiers of the tribes of Thracia who accompanied the
sons of Milesius to Ireland, and cleared a swordland among the Britons,
consisting first of _Maghfortrenn_ or the plains of Fortrenn, and then
of _Maghghirghinn_ or the plains of Cirginn, or as another edition has
it of _Cruithentuath_.[121]

[Sidenote: The Milesians in Scotland.]

In the long line of mythic pagan monarchs sprung from the sons of
Milesius, two come prominently forward as waging war in Scotland, and
hence termed kings of Erinn and Alban, and under the second of these a
settlement is said to have been made. The first of these imaginary
monarchs is Aengus, of the line of Heremon, termed Ollmucadh, from _oll_
great, and _mucadh_ swine, because he is said to have possessed the
largest swine in his time in Ireland. According to the Annals of the
Four Masters he reigned in the year of the world 3773, or 1421 years
before the birth of Christ. He is said to have fought fifty battles
against the _Cruithentuath_, or Picts of Scotland, and the Firbolg;
twelve battles against the Longbardai, and four battles against the
Colaisti, whoever they may be.[122] The second was Reachtaidh Righdearg,
or red-wristed, of the line of Heber, who is said in the same Annals to
have reigned in the year of the world 4547, or 647 years before the
birth of Christ. He led his forces to Alban under Forc and Iboth. ‘They
gained great battles, so that great districts were laid waste in Alban,
until the men of Alban submitted to Reachtaidh Righdearg, so that he was
king of Erinn and Alban, and it was from them sprang the two tribes
Tuath Forc and Tuath Iboth in Alban.’[123]

These supposed settlements, however, become more frequent and distinct
as we pass the birth of Christ and approach the historic period of this
early Irish history. Between the Christian era and the fifth century,
when Christianity was introduced into Ireland, and something like a true
chronological history may be said to commence, two events come
prominently forward in this mythic history. The first is the rising of
the _Attachtuatha_ or servile class of the population of Ireland, and
their massacre of the nobles of Ireland. These _Attachtuatha_ are said
to have been the remains of the Firbolg and other colonists who preceded
the arrival of the Milesian Scots and formed a population of subject
tribes under them, and they have been improperly identified by the Irish
historians with the Attacotti of the Roman historians, who were a
British nation and belonged to a later period. The story as given in the
Leabhar Gabhala, or Book of Conquests, is this.—On the death of Crimthan
Nianair, king of Ireland, of the race of Heremon, about ten years after
the birth of Christ, the nobility of Ireland were massacred at a great
feast at Magh Cro, where they were entertained by the Attachtuatha. They
were all cut off except three queens who were pregnant, and went over
the sea. One was Baine, daughter to the king of Alban, who gave birth to
Feredach Finn Fechtnach, the son of Crimthan. The second was Cruife,
daughter to the king of Britain, and mother of Corb Olum of Munster; and
the third was Aine, daughter of the king of Saxony, who was mother of
Tipraide Tireach, king of the Cruithnigh of Ulster. The Attachtuatha
then set up Cairpre Caitcheann, or cat-headed, one of their own race, as
king, who reigned five years over Ireland. He was succeeded by his son
Morann, who was a just and learned man, and he resolved to recall the
three legitimate heirs. Feradach Finn Fechtnach was elected king, and
the Attachtuatha swore by heaven and earth, the sun, the moon, and all
the elements, that they would be obedient to them and their descendants
as long as the sea surrounded Ireland. Feradach was succeeded by Fiatach
Finn, also of the line of Heremon, and he by Fiacha Finnfolaidh, son of
Feradach, who, after a reign of seventeen years, was killed by the
provincial kings, at the instigation of the Attachtuatha, at the
slaughter of Maghbolg. And again we have a repetition of the same story.
The only person who escaped was his wife Ethne, daughter of the king of
Alban, who was pregnant of his son Tuathal. Elim, son of Conra, king of
the Cruithnigh of Ulster, who had on this occasion joined the
Attachtuatha, then became king, and after a reign of twenty years was
slain in the battle of Aichill by Tuathal, called Teachtmar or the
acceptable, who came from Alban with a large force. Tuathal is said to
have fought 133 battles against the Attachtuatha, whom he reduced to
obedience in the various provinces. He altered the arrangement of the
five provinces by uniting the two Munsters into one province, and formed
a fifth province of Meath as mensal lands for the monarchy, by taking
four portions from each of the other four provinces. Upon the portion
taken from Munster he built Tlachtga, now called the Hill of Ward, and
there the festival of the Fire of Tlachtga was held, and the Druids were
wont to assemble On the portion taken from Connaught he established the
chief seat at Uisneach, now Usnagh Hill, and there the great fair called
the Convention of Uisneach was annually held in May. On the portion
taken from Ulster he constructed Taillte, now Telltown, as the chief
residence. It was here that alliances were made and contracts ratified,
and the fair of Taillte was held. On the portion taken from Leinster the
royal capital of Teamhar or Tara was established where the Feis Temrach
was held every third year, the laws were ordained and published, and the
Ardri or sovereign of Ireland was inaugurated. Tuathal is then said to
have celebrated the Feis Temrach, at which the princes and chieftains of
the kingdom assembled, who all swore by the sun and moon, and all the
elements, visible and invisible, that they would never contest the
sovereignty of Ireland with him or his race. Undoubtedly this formation
of the province of Meath, with its four royal residences, survived to
historic times, and has an unquestionable historic basis.

Another of its great landmarks is the contest which is supposed to have
taken place in the second century between Conn Ced Cathach, or of the
hundred battles, of the line of Heremon, and Eoghan Mor, called Modha
Nuadhat, of the line of Heber, and which led to a division of Ireland
into two parts separated from each other by a ridge termed Eisgir Riada,
leading from Dublin across the island to Galway, composed of a line of
gravel hills which existed long after. The northern half was termed Leth
Cuinn or Conn’s half, and the southern Leth Mogha or Mogha’s half. This
division is mentioned by the old chronicler Tighernac as having been
made in the year 165,[124] and is undoubtedly recognised by Bede when he
distinguishes the northern province of the Scots from the nations of the
Scots who dwell in the southern parts of Ireland.[125] Cormac, son of
Art, and grandson of Conn, is said to have sent a fleet across Magh
Rein, or the plain of the sea, in the year 240, so that it was on this
occasion that he obtained the sovereignty of Alban.[126] He is said by
Tighernac to have obtained the name Ulfata, or ‘the people of Ulster at
a distance,’ because he banished the Pictish tribes of Ulster to Manann
and Innsigall in the year 254.[127]

[Sidenote: The race of Ith in Scotland.]

These supposed settlements in Scotland during this mythic period were,
however, not entirely confined to the kings of the lines of Heber and
Heremon, sons of Milesius, but are also attributed to another line of
kings descended from Lughaidh, son of Ith, who was father’s brother of
Milesius. We read in an ancient tract that ‘these are the tribes of the
Gael that are not of the sons of Miledh, nor of the Tuatha De Danann,
nor of the Firbolg, nor yet of the Clann Neimhead, and that widely did
this tribe spread throughout Erin and Alban. For it is boasted that
Maccon obtained sway over the world, and it is certain that he conquered
the west of Europe, without doubt that is Alban and France and Saxon
land and the island of Britain. And it is boasted concerning Daire
Sirchreachtach that he obtained sway over all the west of Europe; and
some of the learned say that he won the whole world. And it is stated
that Fathadh Canann obtained the government of the whole world from the
rising to the setting sun, and (if it be true) that he took hostages of
the streams, the birds, and the languages.’[128] The first of these
conquerors of the line of Ith, in point of time, was said to be this
Daire Sirchreachtach. He had six sons, all called Lughaidh. The eldest
was Lughaidh Laidhe. Another was Lughaidh Mal, ‘who won the world from
Breatain Leatha or Armorica to Lochlann or Scandinavia, and from Innsi
Orc or the Orkneys to Spain.’ The old tract called the Dinnseanchas,
says of Carnn Mail in Ulster, ‘Whence was it named? It is not difficult
to tell. It was otherwise called Carnn Luighdheach, from Lughaidh Mal,
who was driven from Erinn with a fleet of seven ships; and from Alban he
set out for Erinn with the great fleet of Alban, and they give battle to
the Ulster men and defeated them. Every man that came into battle with
Lughaidh carried a stone, and thus the carn was formed, and it was on it
Lughaidh was standing while the battle was fought;’ and an old poem
quoted in this tract says,

           Lughaidh Mal, who destroyed much,
           Was banished out of Erinn.
           With a fleet of seven ships the king’s son sailed
           From Erinn to the land of Alban.
           He fought for the eastern country
           In battles, in conflicts,
           From Eadain to the wide-spreading Lochlann,
           From the islands of Orc to Spain.
           When he obtained the powerful kingdom,
           He brought with a numerous army,
           So that the harbours of Uladh were filled,
           With the barks of a fierce champion.[129]

Lughaidh Laidhe, the eldest son of Daire Sirchreachtach, was also called
_Macniadh_, or son of the champion, and had a son Lughaidh, called
_Maccon_, or the son of the dog. He is said by the Four Masters to have
reigned in Ireland from the year 196 to 225. His sons were said to be
the three Fothadhs—Fothadh Airctheach, Fothadh Cairptheach, and Fothadh
Canann. The first is said to have been king of Ireland for one year in
289, and to have slain his brother; and of the third, Fothadh Canann, we
are told that he obtained the government of the whole world from the
rising to the setting sun, and took hostages of the streams, the birds,
and the languages, and that from him descended the tribe of Mac Cailin,
or the Campbells, in Scotland.[130] These three brothers are by other
books stated to be of the race of the Ui Eachadh of Uladh or Ulster,
that is, of Pictish descent.

[Sidenote: The race of Colla in Scotland.]

In the fourth century before Christ the three Collas play a great part
in the mythic history of Ireland, and are likewise connected with a
supposed settlement in Scotland. Cormac, the son of Aet, and grandson of
Conn of the hundred battles, whom we have already adverted to, has a
son, Cairbre Liffechair, so called from the river Liffey near which he
was nursed, who likewise becomes _Ardri_ of Erinn. He has two sons,
Fiacha Sraibtaine and Eochaidh Doimlein. The former marries Aeifi,
daughter of the king of the Gallgael, and was the father of Muredach
Tirech, from whom the subsequent kings of Ireland of the race of Niall
derived their descent. The latter marries Oilich, daughter of the king
of Alban, called by some Vadoig, by others Uigari, and has three sons,
Caerill, Muredach, and Aedh. These take the name of Colla, and are
called respectively Colla Meann, Colla da Crioch, and Colla Uais. These
Collas slay their uncle Fiacha, and Colla Uais becomes king of Ireland,
but is driven from thence with his brothers in 326 by Muredach Tirech,
and takes refuge with his paternal grandfather the king of Alban, from
whom he receives _Buannacht_ or military maintenance. Three hundred
warriors were his host. After remaining three years in Alban the three
brothers return to Erinn, each with a following of nine warriors, and
having been reconciled with Muredach Tirech, who tells them they ought
to conquer some territory as an inheritance, they are joined by seven
‘catha’ or battalions of the Firbolg of Connaught, and with their
assistance attack the king of Ulster, march to the Carn of
Achadhleithderg, from whence they fought seven battles, one on each day
of the week, and on the last slay the king of Ulster, plunder and burn
his capital, of Emania, and acquire a large territory as their
swordland, which was termed Oirgialla, and was possessed by their
descendants. This is the story of the three Collas, and in this manner
the great Pictish kingdom, of which Emania was the capital, was supposed
to come to an end in the year 331, and the Cruithnigh of Ulster confined
to the district of Dalaradia on the east coast of Ulster. From Colla
Uais the Sennachies both of Erinn and Alban deduced the descent of
Somerled, who became the Regulus of Arregaidhel and of half of the
Western Isles, and from whom sprang the potent clan of the MacDougalls,
Lords of Lorne, and the MacDonalds, Lords of the Isles.[131]

[Sidenote: The last three pagan kings of Ireland in Scotland.]

The long line of mythic pagan kings of Ireland terminates with a group
of three monarchs who succeeded each other, and are each said to have
made extensive conquests beyond the bounds of their island kingdom. The
first of these is Crimthan Mor mac Fidhaig, of the line of Heber, who
reigned from 366 to 378, and is said to have extended his sway over
Alban, Britain, and Gaul. Of him one of the oldest of the Irish
documents, Cormac’s Glossary, says, under the word Mugeime, ‘that is the
name of the first lapdog that was in Ireland. Cairbre Musc, son of
Conaire, brought it from the east from Britain, for when great was the
power of the Gael on Britain, they divided Alban between them into
districts, and each knew the residence of his friend, and not less did
the Gael dwell on the east side of the sea, as in Scotia or Ireland, and
their habitations and royal forts were built there. Hence is called
_Duin Tradui_, or the triple-fossed fort of Crimthan Mor, son of Fidach,
king of Erinn and Alban to the Ictian Sea.’[132] His successor was Niall
Mor, or the great, who reigned from 378 to 405. He also extended his
conquests over Alban, Britain, and Gaul, and was slain at the mouth of
the Loire on the shore of the Ictian Sea. He was termed Niall
naoighialla, or ‘of the nine hostages,’ as he received hostages from
nine nations which he had subjected to his rule. The last of these great
conquerors was Dathi, who reigned from 405 to 428. He, too, extended his
conquests over Alban, Britain, and Gaul, and was killed by a flash of
lightning at _Sliabh Ealpa_, or the foot of the Alps.[133] He is said,
in another document, to have been king of Erinn, Alban, Britain, and as
far as the mountains of the Alps, where he went to revenge the death of
his predecessor Niall, and was said by some to have been slain by the
same arrow which killed the latter. His body was brought back to Erinn
by his son, who gained nine battles by sea and ten by land by means of
it, for when they exhibited the body they crushed their foes. Dathi is
said to have fought many battles in Alban, viz., the battle of Magh
Circain and the battle of Srath.[134] A tale called ‘The Expedition of
Dathi to the Sliabh n-Ealpa’ gives the following account of his invasion
of Scotland:—‘He invites all the provincial kings and chiefs of Erinn to
a great feast at Tara, and there decides upon making an expedition into
Alban, Britain, and Gaul, following the foot-steps of his predecessors
Crimthan Mor and Niall. His fleet assembles at _Oirear Caoin_, probably
Donaghadee, where he embarks with his troops and sets sail for Alban.
Immediately upon his landing Dathi sends his Druid to Feredach Finn,
king of Alban, who was then at his palace of ‘Tuirrin brighe na Righ,’
calling on him for submission and tribute, or an immediate reason to the
contrary on the field of battle. The king of Alban refused either
submission or tribute, and accepted the challenge of battle, but
required a few days to prepare for so unexpected an event. The time for
battle at last arrived; both armies marched on Magh an Chairthé (the
plain of the pillar stone) in Glenfeadha, Dathi at the head of his Gael,
and Feredach leading a large force composed of Scots, Picts, Britons,
Gauls, Northmen, and Gallgaidheal. A fierce and destructive fight ensued
between the two parties, in which the forces of Alban were at length
overthrown and routed with great slaughter. When the king of Alban saw
the death of his son and the discomfiture of his army, he threw himself
headlong on the ranks of his enemies, dealing death and destruction
around him, but in the height of his fury he was laid hold of by Conall
Gulban, a son of Niall naoighialla, who, taking him up in his arms,
hurled him against the pillar stone and dashed out his brains.’ The
scene of this battle has ever since been called _Gort an Chairthé_ (the
field of the pillar stone), and the Glen _Glenn an Chatha_ or the battle
glen. ‘Dathi set up a surviving son of the late king on the throne of
Alban, and receiving hostages and submission from him, passed onwards
into Britain and Gaul, in both of which countries he still received
hostages and submissions wherever he proceeded on his march.’[135]

Another of the legendary settlements in Alban is connected with the same
Feredach Finn, king of the Cruithnigh of Alban, and may be placed about
the same time. The story is this:—‘Daol, the daughter of Fiachra, king
of Musgry, was the wife of Lughaidh, son of Oillill Flannbeg, king of
Munster. She became enamoured of her stepson Corc, son of Lughaidh by a
former wife, and on his refusal follows the example of Potiphar’s wife
with Joseph, when Corc is banished by his father. He goes to Feredach,
king of Alban, from whom he received great honours and his daughter in
marriage, by whom he had two sons, Cairbre Cruithnecan and Maine
Leamhna. The mother’s name was Leamhan Mongfionn, and these sons were
settled in their mother’s patrimony. Cairbre Cruithnecan fixed on
_Maghghirghinn_, or the plain of Circinn, and from him descended Ængus
Eamhan, king of Alban. Maine fixed on _Maghleamhna_, or the plain of
Leamhan, and from him are the Luimnigh Albain or people of the Levenach
or Lennox.’ The river Leamhan or Leven took its name from Leamhan,
daughter of Feredach Finn, who was drowned in it, and an old poem has
been preserved by Muredach Albanach, several of whose compositions have
been preserved in the Book of the Dean of Lismore, and who appears to
have lived between 1180 and 1220.[136] It was written in the time of
Aluin og, Mormaer of Leamhain, or Lord of Lennox, who, there can be
little doubt, was the same person with Alwyn, first Earl of Lennox, who
was his contemporary. It is addressed to the river Leamhan or Leven, and
refers to the same legend. The poem is so curious that it may be given
at length.

Muredach Albanach sang thus:—

           Noble thy spouse, O Leamhan!
           Alun oge, the son of Muireadhach,
           His waving hair without blackness,
           Descendant of Lughaidh of Liathmhuine.

           Good thy luck in white-skinned spouses,
           Since the time thou didst love thy first spouse,
           For the son of the king of Bealach it was ordained
           That Leamhain should be his spouse.

           Gearr-Abhann was thy name of old,
           In the reign of the kings,
           Until Corc of Munster came over the sea
           With waving hair above his eyes.

           When came Fearadhach Fionn,
           Son of the king of Alban of the Carpets of Gold,
           When he made with Corc alliance.
           Upon coming into his lordship

           Fearadhach gave—to me it seems well—
           His daughter to fair-haired Corc.
           Full of his renown is Tara of Meath,
           Leamhain was the name of the daughter.

           A queenly birth brought forth Leamhan,
           Maine, son of Corc of the long hair.
           She cherished in her bosom the bird
           For Corc of Cashel of the hounds.

           One day that Leamhain was
           (The mother of Maine of the slender fingers)
           With fifty maidens of white soles,
           Swimming in the river’s mouth,

           She is drowned in the bosom of the port.
           Leamhain, the daughter of Fearadhach,
           Thou art named Leamhain after that,
           A remembrance not bad to be related.

           Seldom was the tramp of a Gall battalion
           Upon thy green borders, O river!
           Oftener with thee, O Leamhain!
           The son of a hind above thy Innbhears.

           There has grown up to thee Alun oge,
           Son of Mureadhach of the smooth roads,
           Splendid the colour of his pure fresh hands,
           A scion of the wood of the first Aluin.

           Not alone drinking ale
           Is Alun oge, descendant of Oilleall.
           The branch of the race of Alun sits
           With an hundred to drink from the same gallon.

           Though there should be but one tun of wine
           To the race of Corc of the comely kings,
           Not happy the fair-headed son of Corc
           Should he save the wine from death.

           The Mormaer of Leamhan of the smooth cheek,
           The worthy son of Ailin’s daughter,
           His white hand, his side, his foot;
           Noble is thy spouse, O Leamhan![137]

Such, then, being the record of these supposed conquests of Alban and
settlements in the country presented to us in the early history of
Ireland, their general effect upon the Gaelic population of Scotland is
thus given in another ancient document preserved to us by the Sennachie
McFirbis:—

  ‘The Clan Domnall, Clann Ragnall, Clann Alasdair, Clann Tsithig
  (Sheehy), Clann Eachan, Clann Eadhain, Clann Dubhghal, and Clann
  Ragnall mic Domnall Ghlais, are of the race of Eremon.

  ‘MacGille-Eoin or MacGille a Ea-in (MacLean), the two MacLeods (Harris
  and Lewis), MacConnigh (Mackenzie), Mac a Toisigh (Macintosh), Murmor
  Hundon (Mormaer of Moray?), are of the race of Conaire.

  ‘Murmor Abhaill (Mormaer of Atholl), Murmor Mair (Mormaer of Mar),
  Murmor Gall (Mormaer of Galloway), MacCenedig (Kennedys), Muirgeach
  og, Lord of Granta (Grants), MacCregan (MacGregor?), are also of the
  race of Eremon.’[138]

The first group here given evidently belongs to the supposed settlement
by Colla Uais of the race of Heremon, and consists of the great clans of
the MacDonalds and MacDougalls, and their branches, descended from
Somerled, the great Lord of Argyll, whose traditionary pedigree is
deduced from Colla. The second as certainly comprises those supposed to
be descended from the six sons of Erc, whose pedigree is deduced from
Conaire, a king of Ireland;[139] but among them are included the
MacLeods, whose legendary origin, as we have seen, belongs to an older
race. The third, said to be also descended from the race of Eremon,
seems to be composed of those who could not be included in either of the
two former groups, and likewise presents inconsistencies. The Mormaers
of Athol were of the royal family, and afterwards Stewarts, and under
the title of the Mormaer of Mair, and of Muirgeach og, by whom the earls
of Lennox descended from Aluin og, son of Muredach, seem meant the race
deduced from Corc, king of Munster, who was of the line of Heber, are
here included among the descendants of the line of Heremon.

[Sidenote: How far have these legends a historic basis?]

The turning-point in the chronology of the early history of Ireland may
with some reason be fixed at the battle of Ocha, which was fought in the
year 478, and placed the first Christian monarch on the throne of
Ireland. It obviously separates the artificially-constructed history of
the pagan period which makes so large a demand upon the assent of the
historian from that succession of events which corresponds with all the
historic dates we possess, and commends itself readily enough to our
belief. With the change produced by that event all that is fantastic,
improbable, and artificial ceases, and the incidents recorded are more
natural and in better accordance with what we should expect to find. In
the oldest records of Irish history it appears as a great era from which
the dates of its events were reckoned, and is connected as such with
another settlement of Scots in Alban. We are told by the synchronist
Flann Mainistrech that twenty years elapsed from the battle of Ocha till
the children of Erc, son of Echach Muinremhair, passed over into Alban,
viz., the six sons of Erc, the two Anguses, the two Loarns, and the two
Ferguses[140].

The question then at once arises, To what extent have these legends a
historic basis, and how far may we accept them as true elements in the
history of the population of Scotland?

This question we may at once answer in so far as regards the last
settlement in the series which we have extracted from that history. The
passing over of the sons of Erc into Alban twenty years after the battle
of Ocha is undoubtedly a true event. It was the foundation of the small
Scottish kingdom of Dalriada on the west coast north of the Firth of
Clyde by a colony of Scots, which took place in the year 498, and the
death of its first king, Fergus mor mac Erce, is recorded by Tighernac
in the year 501. The annals of this little kingdom may now be considered
as well ascertained. But can we attribute the same certainty to the
conquests supposed to have been made prior to the battle of Ocha? These
present several features calculated to lead us to a different
conclusion. On looking over the entire succession of those supposed
conquests and settlements in Alban, we can hardly fail to recognise the
same legends repeated at different times and cropping up in different
forms. Thus the supposed conquests of the race of Lughadh, son of Ith,
who were a different race from the Milesian Scots, and the settlement of
Fothadh Canann, from which sprang the Clann Mhic Cailin or Campbells,
seems merely a repetition of the much older settlement of the sons of
Neimhead in the districts of Dobhar and Iardobhar in Alban, who were
likewise a different race from the Milesian Scots, and from whom also
sprang the Clann Mhic Cailin or Campbells; and when the Fothadhs appear
not as of the race of Ith but as of the race of the Ui Eachach of
Ulster, that is, Irial Glunmhar, son of Conall Cearnach, who had two
sons, Forc and Iboth, they become Cruithnigh, and their settlement the
same as that of the two tribes Tuath Forc and Tuath Iboth; and this
again connects them with the supposed conquest by the mythic king
Rechtgidh Righdearg, who in another document appears as Fothadh
Righdearg. In the name Forc we can recognise the old name of the river
Forth, which again connects them with the district between the Tay and
the Forth, which appears to have been intended by the Dobhar and
Iardobhar; but this is the same district which was called by the Picts
Fortrenn, and to which, according to the Pictish legend, Cruithnechan,
the son of Lochit, son of Cinge, came with his Picts to help the Britons
of Fortrenn, and superseded them there; and this again corresponds with
the statement that the descendants of Braodn, son of Fergus Leithdearg,
who had occupied Dobhar and Iardobhar with his Nemedians, were driven
out by the Cruithnigh. And when we are told that Cruithnechan settled
his Picts in Magh Fortrenn and Maghghirghinn, we surely have the same
legend repeated in the supposed settlement of the sons of Corc, king of
Munster, when Cairpre Cruithnechan and Maine Leamhna settle in
Maghghirghinn and Maghleamhna. We can see that under these legends there
simply lies an attempt to express in these stories the popular
conception of the ethnic relations of local tribes. While in these tales
the true localities which form the scene of them are veiled under
fictitious names which it is difficult to identify, there are others
where the apparent distinctness and accuracy with which the localities
are given cast an air of verisimilitude over the narrative, and lead to
the supposition that there must have been some historic foundation for
them; but in these cases it will generally be found that they are real
historic events, which belong to the historic period, but have been
transported to the imaginary realm of mythic narrative by some process
arising from some fancied resemblance in the names of the actors. The
most striking instance of this is in the tale of the conquests in Alban
by the Dathi, the second last of the pagan monarchs of Ireland. The
scene is laid in Maghghirghinn, but this name we know is the original
form of the name corrupted into Mearns, and belongs to a district now
represented by Kincardineshire, but which formerly appears to have
included part of Forfarshire south of it and Mar on the north. Here he
fought the battles of Srath and Maghghirghinn, and the other names
mentioned in the story can also be identified.

Tuirrin, the palace of the Pictish king Feredach Finn, is no doubt the
hill of Turin in the parish of Rescobie in Forfarshire, about 600 feet
high, on the top of which, according to the writer in the old
Statistical Account, ‘there has evidently been anciently a stronghold or
place of defence, consisting of various extensive contiguous buildings,
with a circular citadel of about forty yards in diameter. The situation
has been well chosen, being secured by an impregnable rock in front,
much like the face of Salisbury Crags, and of difficult access all
around. It is now called Kemp or Camp Castle.’[141] Glenfeadha finds its
modern representative in Fithie in the adjoining parish of Farnell,
where too we find Gort an Chairthé corrupted into Carcary. This battle
seems, however, to have been an historic event, and to have really taken
place in the eighth century, for the old chronicler Tighernac records,
in the year 752, the battle of Strath, in the land of Circinn or
Maghghirghinn, between the Pictones, in which Bruidhi, son of Maelchon,
was slain.[142] There, by an anachronism which it is difficult to
explain, the well-known Bruidhe mac Maelchon, who died 200 years before,
takes the place of Feredach Finn. This battle really took place in the
reign of the great Pictish king Angus, son of Fergus; but we find in
763, eleven years after this battle was fought, the Pictish throne
occupied by Cinadon, son of Feredach, and, at the same time, the prince
who ruled over Dalriada, after its conquest by the Pictish monarch, is
Muredach ua Dathi, or grandson of Dathi. The same battle appears a
century later in Hector Boece’s fictitious narrative, where the Scots
under their king Alpin defeat and slay on the same spot Feredach, king
of the Picts.

When we see these Irish monarchs, however, not only conquering Alban and
making settlements there, but extending their conquests over Britain and
Gaul, and carrying their arms even to the foot of the Alps, it is
difficult to avoid the suspicion that we have here localised as Irish
kings some of the Roman emperors connected with the Roman province in
Britain, and some of their acts transferred to Ireland, and that this is
the true source of many of these fabulous events, so far as there is any
foundation for them at all. Thus we find a parallel to the revolt of the
Attachtuatha, or servile tribes of Ireland, against the Milesian kings,
which was finally suppressed by Tuathal Teachtmhar, in the insurrection
of the serf population of Gaul, called the Bagaudæ in the reign of the
emperor Diocletian, which was suppressed by his colleague Herculius
Maximian. Cairbre Cinncait, who was enabled to seize the throne of
Ireland as their leader, and reigned five years, has his counterpart in
Carausius, who, by the help of these Bagaudæ, revolted against Maximian,
and ruled for seven years in Britain as an independent emperor. Conn of
the hundred battles, under whom Ireland became divided into two
provinces, may be a shadow of Constantine the Great, in whose time the
provinces of Britain were divided; and in Niall of the Nine Hostages,
and Dathi the fighter of so many battles, who carried their arms to the
foot of the Alps, we may possibly recognise Theodosius and Maximus, the
emperors who preceded the termination of the Roman power in Britain, and
fought battles in North Britain.

The Conquests in Alban under Crimthan Mor mac Fidhaigh, and his
designation as king of Erinn and Alban, have perhaps a historic
foundation of a different kind. The first really historical appearance
of the Scots in Britain is in the year 360, when, in conjunction with
the Picts, they attacked the Roman province in Britain. The attack was
repeated by the Scots and Picts, who were now joined by the Attacotti
and Saxons in 364, and they ravaged the whole province till the year
369, when they were driven back by Theodosius, and the province
restored. Now the Annals of the Four Masters place the commencement of
Crimthan’s reign in 366, and he reigned twelve years. The period of his
supposed conquests in North Britain synchronises with the appearance of
the Scots in Britain, as recorded by the Roman historian. So also the
subsequent conquests under Niall Mor and Dathi, and the supposed
settlement of the Munster Scots under Corc, king of Munster, with the
three devastations of the province by the Picts and Scots recorded by
Gildas, the first two of which were repelled by the Roman general
Stilicho, and the last by the provincial Britons themselves. The period
of these attacks extended from the year 360 to 409, but it is quite
clear, from the concurrent testimony of all the authorities which record
them, that the Scots were driven back to Ireland, and that they effected
no permanent settlement in Britain till the end of the sixth century,
when the Dalriadic colony was established in the southern part of the
great western district of Arregaithel or Argyll.

[Sidenote: Early connection between Scotland and Ireland.]

We have then, prior to that date, merely temporary conquests in the
province of Britain, commencing in 360, which afford the sole historic
basis to these supposed settlements, and there is no reason to suppose
that prior to 360 a single Scot ever set foot in North Britain. The
connection between the two countries of Scotland and Ireland was,
notwithstanding, a very intimate one. It is quite clear that prior to
the settlement of the Scots in Dalriada, the great nation of the
Cruithnigh or Picts formed the sole inhabitants of Britain north of the
Firths of Forth and Clyde; but while we find them during the historic
period likewise in possession of that part of the province of Ulster
known as Dalnaraidhe or Dalaradia, and Uladh, extending from the Boyne
along its eastern shore to the border of Irish Dalriada, and likewise of
that part of Meath termed Maghbreg or Bregia, yet these early legends
present them to us as forming the original inhabitants of the north of
Ireland, and as constituting one great nation peopling the northern
districts of Britain and Galloway on the east side of the Channel, and
the whole province of Ulster and part of Meath on the western, while the
Scots occupied the rest of Leinster and the whole of Connaught and
Munster. The Cruithnigh of both countries were thus substantially one
people, and remained so till the beginning of the seventh century, and
during this time there must have been a constant intercommunication
between the tribes on both sides of the Channel, as well as a community
of early legends among them. Thus the Pictish Chronicle tells us that
thirty kings of the name of Bruide ruled over Hibernia and Albania
during a period of 150 years, and the Irish Nennius derives the
statement from the books of the Cruithnigh, while an early legend of the
Picts of Dalnaraidhe states that ‘thirty kings of the Cruithnigh ruled
over Erin and Alban, viz., of the Cruithnigh of Alban and of Erin, viz.,
of the Dalnaraidhe from Ollamhan, from whence comes Mur Ollamhan at
Teamhair or Tara to Fiacha mac Baedan, who fettered the hostages of Erin
and Alban.’ This latter event was in the historic time, and must have
occurred between 589 and 626, when Fiacha mac Baedan was king of Ulster.
From this period may therefore be dated the political separation of the
Picts of Alban from those of Erin, who had hitherto been governed as one
nation. The same legend likewise informs us that ‘seven kings of the
Cruithnigh of Alban governed Erinn in Teamhair or Tara. Ollamh was the
name of the first king that governed Erinn at Teamhair and in Cruachan
thirty years. It is from him Mur Ollamhan at Teamhair is; by him was the
feast of Teamhair first instituted.’ Then, after naming his six
successors, the legend adds, ‘These then are the seven kings that ruled
over Erin of the Cruithnigh of Alban.’[143] These seven kings, however,
appear in the list of the mythic pagan kings of Ireland, and are placed
as such by the Annals of the Four Masters as far back as from the year
of the world 3883 to 4019, that is, from the year 1317 to 1181 before
Christ, each of the seven kings reigning exactly thirty years. The first
was Ollamh Fodla, who is, of course, said to be of the race of Ir, and
to him is attributed the tribal organisation of his people; for
according to the Annals of the Four Masters, ‘it was he also that
appointed a Toisech over every Triocha Ceud or barony, and a Bruighigh
over every Baile or township, who were all to serve the king of Erin.’
Under the name of Fodla he appears in the Pictish Chronicle as one of
the seven sons of Cruithne, and two of his successors, viz., Gede
Ollgudach and Finnachta, appear in the list of the Pictish kings of
Scotland among his immediate successors, and precede the thirty kings of
the name of Brude. The numbers peculiar to the Pictish legends are
seven, and thirty, and have, of course, no chronological significance.

But the most brilliant period of the mythic history of these Cruithnigh
of Ulster was that when the champions of the Order of the Red Branch at
Eamhain or Emania were supposed to have performed their great
achievements. They are placed in the fabulous history about the
commencement of the Christian era, and here we find abundant indications
of the close connection between the Cruithnigh of Erin and of Alban.
Among these ancient Irish tales are three which are termed the Three
Sorrowful Stories of Erin, namely the story of the tragical fate of the
children of Lir, the story of the children of Uisneach, and the story of
the sons of Tuirinn.[144]

From the second of these tales we learn that about this time Cathbad, a
Druid of the Picts of Ulster, has three daughters. The eldest, Dectcum,
was the mother of the celebrated champion Cuchullin; the second, Albe,
was the mother of Naisi, Ainle, and Ardan, the three sons of Uisneach;
and the third, Finncaemh, was the mother of Conall Cearnach. These
champions were all trained in a military school at Sgathaig in the
island of Skye, kept by Aife and her father Scathaidh, and by Aife
Cuchullin had a son, Connlaoch, whose history forms one of the Fenian
tales. The place called Sgathaig can be still identified. On the west
side of the parish of Slate in Skye, on an isolated rock overhanging the
arm of the sea termed Loch Eishart, are the remains of an old castle now
termed Dunscaich; and below it, at a little distance from the shore, is
a small island on which is still to be seen one of those ancient
vitrified forts which are so closely connected with these Fenian tales.
It is likewise called Dunsgathaig or Dunscaich, and was no doubt the
site of Aife’s supposed school. Looking across this arm of the sea, the
magnificent and most picturesque range of the Coolins form the principal
feature in the landscape, and hence the three sons of Uisneach, supposed
to have been trained to the use of arms here, are termed in the tale
‘The Three Falcons of Sleibhe Cuillinn,’ that is, of the Coolin hills,
now improperly termed Cuchullin hills.[145] On their return to Ulster,
Naisi, the eldest, falls in love with a fair girl Deirdri, who had been
reared in a tower by Conchubhar, king of Ulster, with the view of making
her his wife. Naisi carries her off, and, accompanied by his two
brothers and one hundred and fifty warriors, goes to Alban, where they
settled in a wild therein, and obtained maintenance of quarterage, that
is, an appanage or land of maintenance to be held for service from the
king of that country. The sons of Uisneach are said in the tale to have
defended by the might of their hands a district and a half of Alban, and
are called ‘the Three Dragons of Dunmonadh,’ which seems to have been
the residence of the kings, as it afterwards was of the Scottish kings
of Dalriada, and may be identified as the isolated hill in the Crinan
Moss on the banks of the river Add, the top of which bears the remains
of a strong fortification, and which was also called Dunadd. In another
poem Naisi is said to have visited the daughter of the Lord of Duntreoin
on his return from the north of Invernois or Inverness, and this is
Duntroon, an old castle on the north side of Loch Crinan.

The place where the sons of Uisneach settled, and where they obtained
their land of maintenance, was on the north shore of the arm of the sea
called Loch Etive, where their seat was no other than that remarkable
vitrified fort crowning the summit of a considerable hill on the shore
of the bay of Ardmuchnish, now called Dun mac Sniochan, a corruption of
the name _Dun mhic Uisneachan_, and to which Hector Boece gave the
fanciful name of Beregonium. Here they are said to have had three booths
of chase—one in which they prepared their food, one in which they ate
it, and one in which they slept. Conchubhar now resolves to tempt them
to return to Ulster, with the treacherous purpose of killing them and
taking Deirdre, but is told that they will not come unless either
Cuchullin, or Conall Cearnach, or Fergus, son of Roigh, another of the
champions of the Red Branch, will go for them and ensure their safety.
Cuchullin and Conall Cearnach both refuse, but Fergus agrees to go,
finds them at _Loch-n-Eite_ or Loch Etive, and at the _Dainghion mhic
n-Uisnech_ or fastness of the sons of Uisneach, and persuades them to
return, much against the wish of Deirdre, who expresses her regret at
leaving that eastern land with its delightful harbours and bays, its
dear beauteous plains of soft verdure, and its sprightly green-sided
hills, and then utters a beautiful lament on leaving that ‘beloved land,
that eastern land, Alban with its wonders.’[146] Deirdre tells Fergus
that the sway of the sons of Uisneach in Alban is greater than that of
Conchubhar in Erin, and her lament bears this out, for the scenery of it
embraces the whole of the eastern part of Argyllshire from the Linnhé
Loch to Loch Long, and among the places mentioned we can identify Glen
Etive at the head of Loch Etive, Inistrynich in Loch Awe, Dun Suibhne or
Castle Swen in Knapdale, Glenlaidhe, or Glenlochy, and Glenurchy at the
east end of Loch Awe, Glenmasan and Glendaruel in Cowall.[147] Alban now
drops out of the tale, and it is unnecessary for our purpose to follow
further the tragical fate of the sons of Uisneach after their return to
Ulster. We find, however, that Conall Cearnach, another of these heroes
of the Cruithnigh of Ulster, has left his traces in the same part of the
country, for Dean Munro, in his description of the Western Isles in
1549, tells us of Dunchonill, one of the group of the Garveloch Isles
which lie off the coast of Lorne—‘Dunchonill, are iyle so namit from
Conal Kernache, are strength, which is alsmeikle as to say in Englische,
are round castle.’ One of the legends of the Cruithnigh of Ulster tells
us that Conall Cearnach married Loncetna, the daughter of Echdhe
Eachbeoil of Alban, who was a Cruithnigh, by whom he had Irial Glinmar,
and adds, ‘This was the cause which brought Cuchulain and Curoi son of
Daire from Alban to Erin.’[148] The mother of Curoi, we learn from other
legends, was Moran Mannanach, the sister of Loncetna. A curious notice
of the Pictish king Echdhe Eachbeoil and the intimate connection between
the Cruithnigh on both sides of the Irish Channel has been preserved to
us in the very ancient document called Cormac’s Glossary, where, under
the word ‘Fir, _i.e_. find’ or white, we are told—‘This, then, was the
appearance of the cows of Echaid Echbel from Alban which Curoi captured,
that is, white cows with red ears;’ and another MS. adds—‘These cows,
then, of Echaid Echbel used to come to graze from Ard-Echdai Echbeil,
from Alban into the district of Dalriatta, and they used to be in Seimne
Ulad. Curoi, however, carried them off by force from the Ulad or Ulster
men.’[149]

We thus see how completely the idea of a close connection, amounting to
identity both of race and nation, between the Pictish inhabitants of
North Britain and the Cruithnigh of Ireland, runs through these popular
tales, and expresses a true state of matters which goes far to explain
the supposed conquests and settlements under the Irish kings of the
mythic and heroic period in Scotland. Although attributed to kings of
the different races into which the descendants of Milesius were supposed
to be divided, we can see that there is always a tendency to connect
them with the Cruithnigh of Ulster. Thus the Fothadhs are by one account
of the race of Ith, and by another Cruithnigh of Ulster. When we read of
the sons of Nemhead settling in Dobhar and Iardobhar in North Britain,
under Braodn the son of Fergus Leithderg, we are reminded at once of the
historic king of the Picts, Brude, son of Urgust or Fergus. When we are
told that the Tuatha De Danaan proceeded from the same district and
bestowed upon Ireland the three designations of Eire, Fodla, and Banba,
from the names of the three queens of their three last kings, we cannot
avoid noticing that these three names are likewise preserved in Scotland
in the river Earn;[150] in Fodla, one of the seven districts named after
the seven sons of Cruithnigh, and which is preserved in Athfotla, the
old name of Atholl; and in Banff. We see too that whenever a Scot is
said during this mythic period to have settled in Alban he is usually
said to be the son of the daughter of a Pictish king, and to have
inherited through his mother. Thus Colla Uais, of the race of Eremon,
has a Pictish mother, and so have the two sons of Corc, king of Munster;
and there is reason to suppose that among the Pictish tribes marriage
was exogamous and that the son of a Pictish mother even by a stranger
was held to belong to the tribe of his mother. Other points of a
connection between these Irish legends and those of Scotland also
suggest themselves. In the story of the insurrection of the
Attachtuatha, or servile tribes of Ireland, against the Milesian Scots,
we are told that the nobility of the latter were cut off at a great
banquet given by the Attachtuatha, and that none escaped except three
nobles who were in their mothers’ womb. This same legend is reproduced
in the legendary history of Scotland, when the supposed destruction of
the Picts by the Scots in the ninth century is said to have been
effected in the same manner, the nobles of the Picts having been cut off
by the Scots at a great banquet.[151]

[Sidenote: The twofold division of the Picts and the establishment of
           Scone as the capital of the kingdom.]

The twofold division of the Scots, supposed to have taken place in the
reign of Conn of the hundred battles, has also its parallelism in
Scotland; and if Bede recognised the division of Ireland into the two
provinces of the Northern and the Southern Scots, he equally viewed the
territory occupied by the great Pictish nation as consisting of the two
provinces of the Northern and the Southern Picts, who were separated
from each other ‘by steep and rugged mountain chains, within which the
latter had seats,’ a description which can only apply to the great chain
of the Mounth, extending from the Eastern Sea to the Western Sea, and
separating the counties of Aberdeen and Inverness from those of
Kincardine, Forfar, and Perth; and to those minor chains proceeding from
it on the south, which, as they terminate in the more level country,
form the great barrier of the so-called Grampians. Towards the end of
the great Pictish kingdom we find Scone appearing as the principal seat
and central point of the monarchy, and Fordun gives as one tradition
‘that it had been anciently fixed as the principal seat of the kingdom
by both the Pictish and Scottish kings;’ and as another ‘that the
ancient kings, even from the time of Cruithne, the first king of the
Picts, had made it the seat of the kingdom of Alban.’[152] Scone is
situated on the left bank of the river Tay, and within the ancient
district of Gouerin or Gowry, and the circumstances connected with this
district, and with Scone as the ancient capital of Scotland, present
features very analogous to those recorded in the legend by which the
province of Meath was formed, and Teamhair or Tara constituted the chief
seat of the monarchy. As Meath was situated where the four ancient
provinces of Ulster, Connaught, Munster, and Leinster meet, so also
Gowry is placed in a central position where the four ancient provinces
of Alban—namely those of Stratherne and Menteath, of Atholl (to which it
appears at one time to have been attached), of Angus and Mearns, and of
Fife and Fothreve—touch each other. As the originally small district of
Meath was enlarged into a province by adding four districts, each of
which was taken from one of the other districts, so we find that there
were four royal manors of Gowry, viz. those of Scone, Cubert, Forgrund,
and Straderdel.[153] These too surround a small central district, and
each lies contiguous to one of the four provinces. Scone, forming the
western district of Gowry, is separated by the river Tay from the old
province of Fortrenn; Cubert or Coupar-Angus, on the north-east, adjoins
Angus or Forfarshire; Forgrund, now Longforgan, on the south-east, is
separated by the Tay from a parish in Fife bearing the same name; and
Stratherdel or Strathardle, on the north, lies within the barrier of the
Grampians, and stretches along the eastern boundary of Atholl. As Meath
was the old mensal land set apart for the support of the Crown, so we
find Gowry too appears to have been a Crown demesne; and as Teamhair or
Tara was not only the place where the Ardri or sovereign of Ireland was
inaugurated, and the laws of the kingdom framed and published, but was
so completely regarded as the central point of the monarchy that the
kingdom was often termed the Kingdom of Tara, so we find the ancient
kings of Alban inaugurated and the laws of the kingdom promulgated at
Scone; and when Kenneth, the first of the Scottish line, overthrew the
Pictish dynasty, he is said in the oldest chronicler who records the
event to have acquired ‘the kingdom of Scone.’[154]




                              CHAPTER IV.

                     THE TUATH OR TRIBE IN IRELAND.


[Sidenote: Mixed population of Scotland.]

The population of Scotland in the reign of Alexander the Third was, as
we have seen, of a very mixed character. The southern frontier of the
kingdom had by this time been advanced to the Solway and the Cheviots,
while the annexation of the Isles in his reign had extended its western
boundary to its utmost limits. Over the whole of this extended territory
the name of Scotland, originally limited to the country north of the
Forth and Clyde, had now spread, and we find the area of this extended
kingdom occupied by a population consisting of three different races.
These were, in the mountainous region of the north and west, the Gael or
Highlanders, the descendants of the Northern Picts of pure Gaelic race,
and of the Gaelic Scots who had settled among them. The more fertile and
level plains forming the eastern seaboard, extending from the Moray
Firth to the Cheviots, had originally been possessed by the Southern
Picts, a mixed race partly of Gael and partly of Britons, but the Angles
of Northumberland had by degrees colonised the whole of it. On the west
the Britons of Strathclyde had extended from the Clyde to the Solway,
but had likewise given way to the Anglic colonisation; while Galloway
west of the Nith was still occupied by a Gaelic people, who had
encroached upon the British territory by occupying the district of
Carrick in the south, the Northern Gael having likewise encroached on
its northern frontier by spreading over the district of Lennox.

[Sidenote: Sources of information as to their early social state.]

The actual population of Scotland had thus consisted of three races—the
two Celtic peoples of the Gael and the Brython or Britons, and the
Teutonic people of the Angles. To these races had been added by King
David the First and his successors the Norman barons, who were overlords
of a great part of the territory of the kingdom, while a Norwegian
population may to some extent have still lingered in the Western Isles.
In endeavouring to ascertain the early social organisation of these
three races, besides the few hints which historical documents afford, we
have the advantage of an ancient code of laws of each race. For the
Angles we have the Anglo-Saxon laws, and for the Britons the early laws
and institutions of Wales, both published by the Record Commission.[155]
For the Gael we have the ancient laws of Ireland, commonly called the
Brehon Laws, now in course of publication;[156] and besides these there
has been preserved a small code in Scotland termed the Laws of the Picts
and Scots, and some fragments of ancient law retained in the hands of
the different kings of the race of David I.[157]

[Sidenote: Tribal organisation of the Gaelic race.]

It is with the Celtic races alone that we have to do in this work, and
principally with those of Gaelic race, who alone preserved a separate
and independent existence in Scotland; and an examination of all those
documents which tend to throw light upon the early social organisation
of the Gaelic as well as of the Cymric race leads us to the conclusion
that it was not territorial or purely patriarchal, but was based on the
community or tribe. Among the people of Gaelic race the original social
unit appears to have been the _Tuath_, a name originally applied to the
tribe, but which came to signify also the territory occupied by the
tribe community;[158] but when we endeavour to ascertain the original
constitution of the Tuath or tribe of the Gaelic race, we are met by a
difficulty analogous to that which we have to encounter in investigating
the history of their language. ‘The formation of the mother tongue
belongs to the prehistoric period, and it is a process which, carried on
in the infancy and growth of the social state, is concealed from
observation. When its possessors first emerge into view and take their
place among the history of nations, counter-influences have already been
at work, their language has already entered upon its downward course,
and we can only watch it in its process of decomposition and alteration,
and reach its primitive condition through the medium of its
dialects.’[159] So it is with the tribe. We nowhere see it in its
primitive form. When it first emerges in the historic period it has
already entered upon a course of modification and change. Various
influences have been at work, both internal, arising from the natural
progress of society, and external, produced from the contact of foreign
organisations, to alter existing forms and introduce new elements, and
thus it undergoes a process of change which leads it further and further
from its primitive constitution.

[Sidenote: Influences affecting the tribe.]

Two leading features of this process can, however, without difficulty be
detected, and may be assumed as tolerably certain. These are, first,
that private property in land did not exist at first, but emerged from a
right of common property vested in the community. Personal property or
individual property in moveables must at all times have existed, but
real property or individual property in the soil is of much later
origin, and is an excrescence upon the common use or property of the
land occupied by the tribe, and is inconsistent with its original
constitution. The second feature is, that the social unit was not the
individual or the family but the community or tribe. The original bond
of union between the members of the tribe was no doubt the belief in a
common origin, a common descent from the _eponymus_, whether mythic or
historic, from whom it took its name; but in the early period to which
we must refer the pure primitive tribe, when the sanctions of marriage
were unknown, and a loose relation between the sexes existed, which is
faintly shadowed forth in a few scattered notices by the Roman authors
of this relation among the Celtic inhabitants of Britain and Ireland,
descent through the females rather than the males must have been viewed
as the more certain link; and it is probable that here as elsewhere
female succession preceded a representation through males, and that the
sons belonged to the tribe of their mothers.[160]

[Sidenote: Effect of the introduction of Christianity.]

The early state of the tribe, however, soon became modified not only by
internal changes but also by external influences. Of these external
influences not the least powerful, and probably the first in order, was
the introduction of Christianity and the adaptation of the Christian
Church to the tribal system. The tribe was thus brought into contact
with a higher civilisation and a purer code of morals. The lax relations
between the sexes, which still survived, must have been checked and
controlled, the sanction of marriage enforced, by which the father is
placed in his legitimate position as head of the family, and the rights
of the children were clearly defined, and the older connection of the
members of the tribe through females reduced in some cases to an
occasional right of succession through the mother, while in others it
entirely disappeared.

[Sidenote: Land originally held in common.]

The oldest tenure by which land was held was that by the tribe in
common. When the tribes passed from the hunting and nomad state to the
pastoral, and became possessed of large herds of cattle, it was a
natural consequence that each tribe should appropriate a special
territory for their better management. The whole of the regulation of
these ancient laws is evidently based upon the fact that cattle formed
the principal property of the original tribes; and long after individual
property in land had become an essential element in the constitution of
the tribe, cattle still formed the standard of value by which everything
was estimated. That a right of individual property in the cattle existed
at a very early period seems very evident, but the land on which they
were pastured was the common property of the tribe, and, after the
cultivation of land began, the arable land was annually divided into
lots, to one of which each member of the tribe had a right. The special
district occupied by the tribe would thus consist of pasture land held
by the tribe in common, on which each member had a right to pasture the
cattle which belonged to him; arable land divided into lots which were
annually or at certain periods assigned to him; and unoccupied and waste
land remaining as the common property of the tribe.

[Sidenote: Distinction of ranks in the tribe.]

These rights belonged, however, to the proper members of the tribe only,
who were as such on an equality with each other; but there soon came,
from other external influences, to be a distinction between those
dwelling within the bounds of the _Tuath_ of _Saor_ or free, and _Daor_
or unfree. The freemen of the tribe were alone recognised as possessing
rights derived from the original constitution of the tribe. The origin
of the class of the unfree is thus stated in connection with the
legendary history of Ireland:—‘The first race of them were the remnant
of the Firbolg themselves, together with the remnant of the Tuath De
Danaan,’ the legendary people who preceded the Milesian Scots. ‘The
second race, the people who passed from their own countries, they being
descended from _Saor chlann_ (or free tribes), who went under
_Daor-chios_ (servile rent) to another tribe. The third people were the
race of the _Saor chlann_, whose land was converted into
_Fearann-chlaidhimh_ (sword-land or conquered country) in their own
territory, and who remained in it in bondage under the power of their
enemies. The fourth race were people of _Saor chlann_ who passed into
bondage for their evil deeds, and who lost their blood and their land
through their evil deeds, according to the law. The fifth people were
those who came from stranger soldiers, _i.e_. from external mercenaries
who left property in Erin. The sixth race were the people who were
descended from the bondmen who came with the Milesians into Erin,’ that
is, who and their forefathers had always been bondsmen.[161]

[Sidenote: The _Ri_ or king.]

Besides this great distinction between the free and the unfree, the free
members of the tribe contained within themselves one distinction which
must have always existed among them, and the germs of others which
became gradually more prominent as the operation of the causes which led
to them more and more influenced the constitution of the tribe. That
combination which produced the tribe must from the beginning have had
leaders and other necessary office-bearers; some one among them must
have had supreme authority as judge in time of peace, and the tribe must
have had a competent leader in time of war. Such functionaries were
necessary as bonds of union; without them the tribe could not have been
kept together in anything like social union; and as the tie which bound
the free members of the tribe together was the belief in a common
origin—a common descent from a mythic _eponymus_ from whom the tribe
took its name—so the _Ri_ or king, who was at the head of the tribe,
held that position not merely by election but as the representative in
the senior line of the common ancestor, and had a hereditary claim to
their obedience. As the supreme authority and judge of the tribe he was
the _Ri_ or king. This was his primary function. Thus we are told that
‘it is lawful for a king to have a judge _though he himself is a
judge_.’[162] As the leader in war he was the _Toisech_ or Captain, and
bore the one or the other title as either function became most
prominent, while in some cases these functions might be separated and
held by different functionaries. Although the _Ri_ or king derived his
authority from his claim to be the senior representative of the common
ancestor, the office was still, from the necessity of being filled by a
properly qualified person, to a certain extent elective. It was
hereditary in a certain family, but elective among the members of that
family; and an additional safeguard against the tribe being left without
a proper head was provided by another member of the family being elected
_Tanaist_ or successor to the _Ri_ or king in the event of his death.
That the hereditary character of this office existed from primitive
times is apparent from this, that a somewhat similar law of succession
prevailed in the early Irish Church, the abbot or head of the monastery
being chosen from a particular family; and while the influence of the
Church may have confirmed, if it did not establish, a strict descent in
the male line in the tribe,[163] a hereditary succession in the Church
must have been derived from the close connection which had been formed
between the Church and the tribe, and from the influence of the tribe
upon the Church and not of the Church upon the tribe. While the whole of
the land was still the common property of the tribe, the _Ri_ or king
had no separate possession of land, but in this respect was on an
equality with the free members of the tribe, and entitled only to the
same right of pasturage for his cattle on the pasture land and to the
share of the arable land annually allotted to him; but in addition to
this he was maintained in the dignity of his office at the expense of
the tribe, and this right of maintenance, according as the tribe and its
wealth increased, assumed various forms, one of which may have arisen
from the influence of the Church, and given the first impulse to
something like separate possession of land. When the Church was
established in connection with a tribe, a grant of part of the tribe
land and its separation from the rest became a necessity for the
maintenance of the Church, and thus those Termon lands which form so
marked a feature in the territorial position of the Irish Church, came
into existence. Analogous to this, one form which this right of
maintenance on the part of the _Ri_ or king assumed was, that a portion
of land was likewise separated from the common land of the tribe as
mensal land for the support of the dignity of the _Ri_ or king for the
time being.

[Sidenote: Distinction of ranks arising from possession of cattle.]

Another cause must also of necessity have produced distinction of
position between the free members of the tribe. Such an equality as may
be held to have existed originally among the members of the tribe can
hardly have been preserved unless there was also an equality in their
personal characteristics and their wealth in cattle. The natural
operation of differences of character and wealth was to create
distinctive classes among them. Those of superior abilities soon take
the lead of others, and those whose prudence and sagacity enabled them
to increase their possession of cattle must soon have occupied a more
important position in the tribe, as their share of the annual allotment
of land was regulated by the size of their herd. Thus there came to be
recognised in the tribe a gradation of ranks founded upon the possession
of personal wealth and importance. The lowest grade in the tribe was the
_Fer Midba_ or inferior man, of whom there were two classes. As soon as
a member of the tribe reached the age of fourteen he was emancipated
from the control of his parents and acquired certain rights, but was not
vested with his full privileges till the encircling of the beard, that
is, till he became twenty years old, when he was entitled to a separate
residence (_Sain trebhta_) and a share of the tribe land (_Sealbh_).
Above the _Fer Midba_ was the _Boaire_ or Cowlord, whose superior wealth
in cattle, with the exclusive possession of a homestead, gave him a kind
of nobility over the tribe’s man. Of the _Boaire_ class there were six
grades. The lowest rank, to which the title of _Aire_ was given, was the
_Ogaire_ or young lord who had ‘newly taken householdship upon him.’ His
property was reckoned by the number seven. He had seven cows with their
bull, seven pigs with a boar, seven sheep, and a horse for work and
riding. He possessed a house but no land in property. The land required
for the support of seven cows was termed a Cow-land, and he left one cow
at the end of the year in payment for it. He had the fourth part of a
plough, and therefore his possession with the arable land attached to it
formed probably the fourth part of a ploughgate, or thirty acres,
equivalent to the husbandland in Scotland. The next higher grade was the
tenant resident (_Aithech ar athreba_). He represented a small community
of four or five, occupying jointly as much land and possessing in common
as much stock as would entitle a single person to be a _Boaire_. He had
ten cows, ten pigs, ten sheep, but, like the _Ogaire_, the fourth part
of ploughing apparatus, which is here defined to be an ox or
ploughshare, a goad, and a bridle. He was so named as occupying a part
only of as much land as would entitle him to be called a _Boaire_ along
with others, the joint possession being sufficient for the purpose.
Above him was the _Boaire febhsa_, so called ‘because it is from cows
his rank as an _Aire_ and his honor price are derived.’ He had land of
the value of twice seven _Cumhals_, or forty-two cows. He had a house
with a back house or kitchen, a share in a mill, a kiln, a barn, a
sheephouse, a calf-house, and a pigstye. These are the seven houses from
which each _Boaire_ was rated, and formed the complete _Rath_ or
homestead. It was surrounded by a precinct or _Maigne_, which was a
space as far as the _Boaire_ could cast a spear with an iron head, or
hammer, sitting at the door of his house, and was inviolable. The whole
was usually enclosed by a ditch and earthen rampart. And he possessed
twelve cows and half a plough. Land of the value of three times seven
_Cumhals_ or sixty-three cows, and the possession of twenty cows, two
bulls, six bullocks, twenty hogs, twenty sheep, four house-fed hogs, two
sows, and a riding-horse, made him a _Bruighfer_, and entailed upon him
the burden of ‘receiving the king, bishop, poet, or judge from off the
road,’ as well as all travellers. And here too the court of judgment was
held for the tribe and the assembly of the tribe’s men. When the
_Boaire_ possessed so large an amount of stock as to be obliged to give
off some to others he becomes a _Ferfothla_, and ‘the excess of his
cattle which his own land cannot sustain, which he cannot sell for land,
and which he does not himself require, he gives as the proportionate
stock of tenants’ (_Ceile_). The highest grade of the _Boaire_ was the
_Aire-coisring_, who represented the people before the king and the
synod.

[Sidenote: Origin and growth of private property, and creation of Fan
           order of territorial chiefs.]

The superior position in which the _Boaire_ was placed towards the other
members of the tribe, his more extensive stock, and the exclusive
possession of his homestead, must have naturally led to a desire to
retain the same land in his family, instead of being subjected to annual
change; and the larger his possession the more easily he would obtain
this, which was an inevitable step to the introduction of rights of
private property in the land of the tribe. When the same family had
retained possession of land for three generations it came at length to
constitute a right of property, and thus a class of territorial lords
was created whose position as _Aires_ was based upon property in land.
This right of property and all the privileges connected with it was
termed _Deis_, and they formed a superior class of territorial magnates,
who were termed _Flaith_ or chieftains, and constituted an order termed
the _Grad Flaith_, in contradistinction to the _Grad Feine_ or inferior
order.

In the division of these respective orders, if not in the actual
introduction of an individual right of property in land, we can again
trace the influence of the Christian Church. In one of the tracts
forming the collection of laws termed the Brehon, but not one of the
most ancient, the following account of these divisions is given:—‘How
many divisions are there of these?—Seven. What is the division of the
grades of a Tuath derived from?—From the similitude of ecclesiastical
orders, for it is proper that for every order which is in the Church
there should be a corresponding one in the Tuath.’ But this number of
seven is purely arbitrary, for we are told that the grades of the Tuath
consist of the ‘Fer Midba, the Boaire, the Aire desa, the Aire ard, the
Aire tuise, the Aire forgaill, and the Ri or king. If it be according to
the right of the Feinechus law, it is in such manner these seven grades
are divided.’ But then follows—‘What is the division if it be not the
Boaire with his eight divisions?’ that is, if the ‘Grad Feine,’ or
inferior order consisting of eight divisions, is excluded; and the
answer is—‘The Aire desa, the Aire echta, the Aire ard, the Aire tuise,
the Aire forgaill, the Tanaist of the Ri or king, and the Ri or king.’
Here the number of seven is made up by adding to the Grad Flaith an Aire
echta and the Tanaist.[164]

[Sidenote: The _Ceile_ or tenants of a chief.]

As these ranks of the _Grad Flaith_ possessed an increasing amount of
stock beyond what their own land could maintain, one great
characteristic of the order was their possessing tenants or _Ceile_,
that is, persons of the inferior order to whom they gave their surplus
stock in return for a food-rent, services, and homage; the gift being
termed _Taurcreic_ and the food-rent _Besa_. And as the territorial
lords appropriated more and more land of the tribe as individual
property, it is obvious that the land remaining for division among the
freemen of the tribe must have been proportionately diminished, while
the natural increase of the population must have increased the evil. An
ancient tract tells us that ‘numerous were the human beings in Ireland
at that time (A.D. 658-694), and such was their number that they used
not to get but thrice nine ridges for each man in Ireland, viz., nine of
bog, and nine of smooth or arable, and nine of wood;’ and we read in the
_Lebor na huidre_ that ‘there was not ditch nor fence nor stone wall
round land till came the period of the sons of Aed Slane (the same
period), but smooth fields. Because of the abundance of the households
in their period, therefore it is that they introduced boundaries in
Ireland.’[165] Thus, as the land and the wealth in cattle of these
_Flaith_ or territorial lords increased, the freemen of the tribe who
were still independent became poorer, and their lots diminished, and by
degrees they began voluntarily to place themselves under these lords by
accepting stock from them, in return for which they became their
dependants. Where the _Flath_ contributed merely an addition to the
stock of the freeman who already possessed some, he became his _Saer
Ceile_ or free tenant, and had to return the value of a third of the
stock annually for seven years; and besides this the tenant might be
called upon to give certain services termed _Manchaine_, such as
assisting in building a fort, reaping the harvest, or going on hostings,
and had to pay a food-rent for his house, termed _Bestigi_, likewise did
homage on paying his rent, termed _Ureirge_. Where the Flath furnished
the entire stock for the tenant he had to give security for its return,
and became his _Daer Ceile_ or Bond-tenant, and had to pay a food
tribute termed _Biathad_ twice a year.[166]

The _Aire desa_ had ten such tenants, five bond and five free. He is
described as ‘the son of an Aire and the grandson of an Aire, with the
property of his house.’ The _Aire echta_ seems to have ranked with the
_Aire desa_. The _Aire ard_ had twenty tenants or _Ceile_, ten bond and
ten free. The _Aire tuise_, so called ‘because his race has precedence,
and he takes precedence of the _Aire ard_,’ had twenty-seven tenants or
_Ceile_, fifteen bond and twelve free; and the _Aire forgaill_ or
highest rank has forty tenants or _Ceile_, twenty bond and twenty free.
Besides these _Ceile_ or tenants, so constituted by voluntary contracts
between the freemen and the _Flath_ or chief, he had likewise _Bothach_
or Cottiers and _Fuiddhir_, strangers, or broken men from other tribes,
whom he settled upon his waste land in return for homage and service,
and these, if they had remained nine times nine years on the land,
became what were called _Sencleithe_ or old standers.[167]

This account of how the constitution of the tribe became modified and
altered by the effect of internal change and external influence pretends
to be nothing more than a speculative view of it, but we have now
reached that stage in its progress when it fairly enough represents the
tribe in the form in which we find it in the ancient Irish laws; but as
these laws with their commentaries belong to different periods, some
branches of them being obviously more modern than others, this must be
borne in mind in endeavouring to extract a view of the organisation of
the tribe from them.

[Sidenote: State of the _Tuath_ or territory of a tribe.]

The territory belonging to a tribe is now termed _Tuath_, the tribe
itself _Ciniol_, as implying a race of men sprung from a common
ancestor. The land of the tribe is now found in three different
positions. There was first that part of the original territory of the
tribe which still remained the _Feacht Finne_ or common property of the
tribe, and consisted of the common pasture lands, on which each freeman
of the tribe had a right to pasture his cattle, and of the common
tillage lands annually divided among those freemen who possessed cattle,
a possession which entitled them to the usufruct of a share of the
arable land and to a habitation in each township. The cattle each person
had were termed his _Cro_, a name also applied to the enclosure in which
they were housed, and the entire cattle of the tribe were termed their
_Creaght_. Then, secondly, there was the official or mensal land set
apart for the maintenance of the _Ri_ or _Toisech_, the _Tanist_, and
the other functionaries of the tribe, as the Bard, the Brehon or judge,
the Sennachy or historian, etc.; and along with this land may be classed
the Church land or Termon land given to the Church free of all
imposition, which land was held to form a sanctuary. Lastly, there was
the land held by individual ownership. This land was the _Orba_ or
inheritance land, which belonged to the _Flaith_ or chiefs, and which
was transmissible to their successors. The principal part of this land
was retained by the chief in demesne, and on it he had settled the
strangers called _Fuidhir_ who consisted of two classes, Free and Bond,
and formed a body of retainers entirely under his control; and here too
were the _Bothach_ or Cottiers, and those who by length of residence had
become _Sencleithe_. The land not retained by himself was given off to
freemen of the tribe to whom he had given stock either by _Saer_ or by
_Daer_ stock tenure, and who thus became his _Ceile_ or tenants.

[Sidenote: The _Dun_ or fort.]

The stronghold of the tribe was the _Dun_ or fort, which the _Ri_ alone
had a right to occupy, and of which each king was bound to have at least
three. The description given of it is as follows:—‘Seven score feet are
the dimensions of the Dun every way; seven feet the thickness of the
mound at top; twelve feet at bottom. Then only is he king, when he is
encircled by the moat of servitude. Twelve feet is the breadth of its
mouth and of its bottom, and its length is the same as the Dun. Thirty
feet is its length on the outside.’[168] The average number of fighting
men which a tribe turned out on ordinary occasions appears to have been
700.[169] The possessions of the Church within the territory of the
tribe varied in extent from half a _Ballyboe_ or ploughgate, till in
some cases the Dun itself and the possessions of the king or chief were
granted to found a monastery, and in those cases where the monastery was
said to have consisted of 3000 monks, the tribe itself appears to have
merged in the Church. There came to be a lay and a clerical _progenies_,
and the head of the tribe appears to have been chosen alternately from
the tribe of the land and the tribe of the patron saint.[170] The free
and bond _Ceile_ then became free and bond _Manachs_, their position
being substantially the same.

[Sidenote: The _Mortuath_.]

Such being the aspect in which the tribe is presented to us in the
ancient laws of Ireland, it must not be assumed that these tribes, thus
possessing a complete organisation in themselves, were at this period
independent of each other. From even a much earlier period they seem to
have been united in a constitutional framework, by which they formed a
kind of federal nation. Several of these _Tuaths_ were grouped together
to form a still larger tribe, termed a _Mortuath_ or great tribe, over
whom one of the kings presided as _Ri Mortuath_. The normal number
forming a _Mortuath_ is in one place stated as three, and in another
seven.

[Sidenote: The _Cuicidh_ or province.]

Then several of these _Mortuath_ formed a province, called in Irish
_Cuicidh_, or a fifth. The name is interpreted as implying that the
_Mortuath_ thus united were five in number, but the usual explanation is
more probable, that as there were five provinces in Ireland—Meath,
Leinster, Munster, Connaught, and Ulster—it means that each was the
fifth part of Ireland. Over each province was the _Ri Cuicidh_, or
provincial king, and then over the whole was the _Ardri_, or sovereign
of all Ireland.

[Sidenote: The law of Tanistry.]

The succession to these several grades of _Ri_ or king was the same as
that of the _Ri Tuath_, and was regulated by the law of Tanistry, that
is, hereditary in the family but elective in the individual, the senior
of the family being usually preferred; but as, when the king was chosen,
the Tanist would naturally be selected from the next most powerful
branch of the family, it fell at length into an alternate succession
between the two most powerful branches. This becomes at once apparent
when we examine the actual succession of these kings as recorded in the
Annals. The sovereignty over the whole of Ireland fell for several
centuries into one branch of the great family called the Northern Hy
Neill, and the throne was filled alternately from two branches of it.
The succession of the kings of Munster shows the same peculiarity of an
alternate succession between the descendants of two sons of the mythic
founder of that kingdom, and furnished the illustration upon which a
Dissertation on the Law of Tanistry, attributed to General Vallancey,
but really written by Doctor John O’Brien, Bishop of Cloyne, was
founded. The province of Ulster, where an ancient Pictish population was
encroached upon and gradually superseded by Scottish tribes, exhibits
the remarkable peculiarity of an alternate succession of the kings of
Ulster between a family descended from its old Pictish kings and one of
the earliest colonies of Scots, that of the _Dalfiatach_, who settled
among them.[171]

[Sidenote: Connection between superiors and dependants.]

The tie which bound these groups together, and united the chain which
connected the _Ardri_ with the _Ri Tuath_, was the same which linked the
latter with his dependent chiefs, and those with their _Ceile_. The
dependence of one upon another possessed the invariable feature of a
gift or subsidy from the superior to the inferior, and corresponding
duties from the inferior to the superior. In one of the law tracts the
gift from the superior appears as _Taurcreic_, or proportionate stock,
and the return as _Bestighi_, or food-rent of the house, and ranges from
a _Taurcreic_ of five Seds, and a _Bestighi_ of a wether, with its
accompaniments, consisting of cakes, milk, and butter, as the lowest for
the _Fermidba_ to a _Taurcreic_ of fifteen _Cumhals_, or forty-five
cows, and a _Bestighi_ of eight cows for the _Ri Tuath_.[172] We derive
the fullest information on this subject from the ancient tract termed
the Book of Rights. We there see the gift or _Tuarastach_, as it is
there called, made by the _Ardri_ to the different provincial kings, by
them to the kings of the respective _Mortuath_, and by the latter to the
_Ri Tuath_; while the corresponding returns made by the inferior to the
superior king consisted first of a small fixed rent, which in one case
consisted of a _Sgreaball_, or threepence, from each _Baile_ or
township,[173] and a tribute termed _Cobhach_, which included, in the
case of Munster, a submission paid in cattle, termed _Smacht_, and a
_Biathad_ or refection; and each king was entitled to a maintenance when
going beyond his own territory, called _Coinnim_, corrupted into Coigny;
and besides these, service in war was due from each inferior tribe to
the superior, distinguished into _Feacht_ or expedition, and _Sluaged_
or hosting. The number of fighting men each _Tuath_ had to provide was
700, and each _Mortuath_ three companies, or 2100 men.

[Sidenote: The system of fines.]

Another feature of the ancient tribal system in Ireland, presented to us
in the Brehon Laws, must not be overlooked, and that is the system of
fines, in which respect it closely resembled not only similar
regulations in the Welsh Laws but likewise in those of the Anglo-Saxons.
In that early state of society the idea that the slaughter or injury of
any of its members was a crime against the State, which required the
punishment of the criminal in vindication of the law of the land, was
entirely unknown. The slaughter or injury of the member of the tribe was
considered as a loss to the tribe itself, which must be compensated for,
and when compensation was made and accepted the criminal was free.
Originally the compensation was probably simple retaliation, but
afterwards this right of retaliation might be bought off by payment of a
fine. That a tradition of this kind existed appears from a passage in
the Introduction to the Senchus Mor, in which we are told that
‘retaliation prevailed in Erin before Patrick, and Patrick brought
forgiveness with him. At this day we keep between forgiveness and
retaliation; for as at present no one has the power of bestowing heaven
as Patrick had at that day, so no one is put to death for his
intentional crimes, so long as Eric fine is obtained; and whenever Eric
fine is not obtained, he is put to death for his intentional crimes, and
placed on the sea for his unintentional crimes.’ Sir Henry Maine, in
commenting on this passage, justly remarks, that ‘it is impossible, of
course, to accept the statement that this wide-spread ancient
institution, the pecuniary fine levied on tribes or families for the
wrongs done by their members, had its origin in Christian influences;
but that it succeeded simple retaliation is in the highest degree
probable.’[174]

[Sidenote: The Honor price.]

The system of fines was based in the main upon a fixed value put upon
each person, estimated according to his position and rank, and expressed
by a standard of value in cattle. This was his _Enechlann_ or Honor
price, and it enters as an element into all the pecuniary relations of
the different members of the tribes with each other. This standard of
value was expressed in two forms. First by what was termed a _Set_ or
_Sed_, by which single animals of different value were meant. The next
was the _Ri Set_ or milch cow, which was equal to two _Samaiscs_ or
three-year-old heifers or mules, and each _Samaisc_ was equal to two
_Dairts_ or _Colpachs_, that is, two-year-old heifers or bulls, and the
rule was that of every three _Sets_ one must be of each kind.[175] The
other standard of value was the _Cumhal_, which originally meant a
female bondslave, and was equal in value to three milch cows.

The Honor price of the _Ogaire_ was three _Seds_, but they must be
_Seds_ of the cow kind. Five _Seds_ that of a _Boaire_; ten _Seds_ that
of the _Aire desa_; fifteen that of the _Aire ard_; twenty that of the
_Aire tuisi_; twenty-four that of the _Aire forgaill_; thirty _Seds_
that of the Tanist or successor to the king of the tribe; and seven
_Cumhals_, or twenty-one cows, that of the king himself. The king of a
_Mortuath_ has an additional _Cumhal_, or three cows more, to make up
his Honor price. The Honor price of a son of each rank was equal to that
of the rank immediately below it. The intentional slaughter, then, of
one of these persons might be compensated by payment of the Eric fine,
which was equal to the Honor price of the person slain. Other fines were
the Dire fine for injury to a man’s property, and the _Smacht_ or body
fine. A share of these fines fell to the _Flath_ or chief under whom the
person injured was, and also to the king of the tribe, which formed no
insignificant portion of his revenue.

[Sidenote: System of land measures.]

In combination with the tribal organisation, there was also in Ireland
an ancient system of fixed land measures adapted to it. The largest of
these divisions was the _Trichaced_, which was considered as the normal
extent of the _Tuath_ or territory of a tribe. It contained thirty
_Bailebiataghs_, and each _Bailebiatagh_ twelve _Seisrighs_ or
ploughlands, also termed _Ballyboes_, and these were the townships, and
the distribution of the land among the freemen of the tribe appears to
have been separately allotted in each township to its occupants. An
ancient poem,[176] printed by Mr. O’Donovan in his edition of the Battle
of Magh Lena, gives probably the oldest view of these land divisions
over all Ireland, as it is attributed to the same Finntan who is said to
have preserved the record of the ancient mythic colonisation of Ireland.
The poem is thus translated by Mr. O’Donovan, the denomination of land
being, however, retained untranslated:—

       1. How many Trichas in noble Erinn,
          How many half Trichas to accord,
          How many Bailes in linked array,
          How many doth each Baile sustain.

       2. How many Bailes and Tricha-ceds,
          In Erinn the abundant in wealth.
          I say unto thee—an assertion with sense—
          I defy all the learned to confute it.

       3. Do not say that you defy me,
          Said Finntan, the man of sense;
          I am the most learned that has been
          In Alban, in Erinn.

       4. Ten Bailes in each Tricha-ced,
          And twenty Bailes (thirty in all), it is no falsehood;
          Though small their number to us appears,
          Their extent form a noble country (Crich).

       5. A Baile sustains three hundred cows,
          With twelve Seisrighs, it is no lie;
          Four full herds may therein roam,
          With no cow of either touching the other.

       6. I enumerate eighteen Trichas
          In the country of Meath of ample wealth.
          And thirty Trichas more
          In the country of Connaght yellow-haired.

       7. I enumerate fifteen Trichas,
          And twenty Trichas; without falsehood
          This I say to you—a saying bold—
          In the great province of Ulster.

       8. Eleven Trichas in Leinster,
          And twenty of teaming wealth,
          From Inbher Duibhlinne hither
          Unto the road of the Boroimhe.

       9. Ten Trichas in Munster,
          And threescore in full accordance,
          In the two proud provinces (N. and S. Munster),
          In the great extensive Munster.

       10. I enumerate four Tricha-ceds,
          And ninescore (184 in all), it is no falsehood,
          Without the deficiency to any Tricha of them,
          Of one Baile or half a Baile.

       11. Twenty Bailes, too, and five hundred
          And five thousand (5520 in all), it is no falsehood
          Since I have taken to divide them,
          Is the number of Bailes in Erinn.

       12. Two score acres three times,
          Is the land of the Seisrigh;
          The land of three Seisrighs, therefore,
          Is the quarter of a Bailebiataigh.

       13. To twelve Seisrighs in full,
          The Bailebiataigh alone is equal;
          As I am Finntan, a man of sense,
          The tenth generation from Adam.

       14. The history of Erinn in memory,
          As it is in all the books,
          Finntan, the truly intelligent, hath.
          Of him is asked how many.

The _Seisrigh_ or ploughgate, which represents the sown land, is here
stated to contain 120 acres and twelve ploughgates, with as much pasture
land as sustained 300 cows, or four herds of seventy-five each formed
the _Bailebiatagh_. Thirty _Bailebiataghs_ constituted a _Tricha-ced_,
which would thus contain 43,200 acres; and as, according to the poem,
there were 184 _Tricha-ceds_ in Ireland, this represents about one-half
of the acreage of the whole country, assuming that the ancient and
modern acre was the same in extent. The other half would thus represent
the waste lands, which were turned to no profitable account.

These measures of land make their appearance at an early period in the
mythic history of Ireland, for it is recorded of Ollamh Fodla, one of
the most remarkable figures who appears in this extraordinary catalogue
of shadowy monarchs, and who is said to have flourished twelve centuries
before Christ, that ‘it was he also that appointed a _Toisech_ over
every _Tricha-ced_, and a _Brughaidh_ over every _Baile_, who were all
to serve the king of Erinn.’[177] They emerge also in the historic
period in the tenth century, when a great fleet of Danes landed at
Limerick and plundered and ravaged Munster, both churches and tribes
(_Cella_ ocus _Tuatha_), and their king is said to have ‘ordained kings
(_Rigu_), chiefs (_Taishechu_), _Maers_ and _Reactdairidu_ or stewards
in each land (_Tir_) and in each _Tuath_, as well as levied the _Cis
rigda_, or dues of the kingdom,’ that is, confirmed the old tribal
organisation, substituting Danes for Gael, so that there was ‘a king
(_Ri_) for each _Tir_, a _Toisech_ for each _Tuath_, an abbot for each
_Cill_ or church, a _Maer_ for each _Baile_, and a _Suairtleach_ in each
_Tigi_ or homestead.[178] In the succeeding century it is told of Brian
Boroimhe, the Munster king who reigned over Ireland from 1002 to 1014,
and defeated the Danes in the great battle of Clontarf, that ‘during his
time surnames were first given, and territories (_Duchadha_) allotted to
the surnames, and the boundaries of every _Tuath_ and every _Tricha-ced_
were fixed.’[179]

But although these ancient measures of land are represented as
possessing a definite and fixed extent, yet there seems to be little
doubt that they varied very much in different parts of Ireland. Thus the
unit of the _Seisrigh_ or ploughgate seems to have been of two kinds—a
larger measure of 120 acres in some parts of Ireland, and a smaller
measure of 60 acres in other parts. We also find the _Ballybiatagh_
consisting of sixteen _Taths_ in place of twelve ploughgates, the _Tath_
containing sixty acres.

[Sidenote: Later state of the tribes.]

But not only do these measures of land vary in size and denomination,
but the _Tuath_ or tribe territory appears also to have varied in
different parts of Ireland as well as the constitution of the tribe
possessing it. The publications of the Irish Archæological and Celtic
Societies afford specimens of this in four of the provinces in Ireland.
Thus the preface to the poems of John O Dugan, who died in 1372, opens
with reference to Meath with the general statement—‘His country
(_Duthaidh_) to every _Ardrigh_ and to every _Urrigh_ and to every
_Taoisech_ of a _Tuath_ in Erin.’[180] In the district of Corca Laidhe
in Munster, which represented a _Mortuath_, instead of containing merely
three or seven _Tuaths_, we find eight _Tuaths_ mentioned, and of seven
of these the head of the tribe is termed its _Toisech_, and bears the
same name, while the _Flaith_ or chiefs are called _Oclaich Duthaich_,
or the champions of the territory. The first is the _Duthaich_ or
country of _O Gillamichil_, with seventeen _Oclaich_. Then we have the
_Tuath Ui Chonneid_, with O Conneid as its _Toisech_, and five
_Oclaich_. Then _Tuath Ruis_, with O Laeghaire as its _Toisech_, and
eleven _Oclaich_ or chiefs. Then Tuath O’n-Aenghusa, with O h-Aenghusa
as its _Toisech_, and fourteen _Oclaich_. Then Tuath O’Fithcheallaigh,
with O’Fithcheallaigh as its _Toisech_, and eight _Oclaich_. Then Tuath
O’n Dunghalaigh, with O Dunghaill as its _Toisech_, and nine _Oclaich_.
Then Tuath Ui-Dubhdaleithe, with O Dubhdaleithe as its _Toisech_ and
seven _Oclaich_. The boundaries of these several _Tuaths_ are likewise
given.[181]

In the province of Connaught we have also an account of four of the
great territories, which furnishes us also with some information
regarding the constitution of the tribes there. In a tract printed in
the appendix to ‘The Tribes and Customs of Hy Fiachraich’ we find the
following statement:—‘Connaught (and, I suppose, other provinces) was
anciently distinguished into countries called Doohie (_Duthaidh_) or
Tyre (_Tir_), named from such and such families or nations inhabiting
them, as in the barony of Athlone, Doohie Keogh, the country or nation
of the Keoghs. In the barony of Ballintobber, Doohie Hanly, the country
of the Hanleys, and betwixt Elphin and Jamestown, that sweet country
Teer O Ruin (_Tir Briuin_) and Teer O Byrne, the country of the Beirns.
These countries were subdivided into townlands (in some other parts of
Ireland known by the name of ploughlands), which were called Ballys, as
in Doohie Hanley _Bally nengulluh_, or Gyllstown, _Ballygilleclinne_,
(the town of the Chlinnes), _Ballyfeeny_, etc.; and each townland was
divided again into quarters, which are generally known and distinguished
by certain meares and bounds, and for that reason the name of quarter is
used as though it signified a certain measure; and now the lands here
are generally set and let, not by the measure of acres but by the name
of quarters, cartrons, and gnieves, a quarter being the fourth part of a
townland, and a gnieve the sixth part of a quarter, and a cartron also
the fourth part of a quarter (although in other parts of Ireland a
quarter is the same part that a cartron is here, and a gnieve the fourth
part of a cartron). I have been sometimes perplexed to know how many
acres a quarter contains, but I have learned it is an uncertain measure,
and anciently proportioned only by guess, or according to the bigness of
the townland whereof it was a parcel.’[182]

From the tract termed the ‘Hereditary Proprietors (_Duthchusaigh_) of
the Clann Fiachrach’ we obtain some further information. The territory
possessed by the tribe appears under different names. These are _Triocha
Cheud_, _Taoisidheacht_, or territory ruled over by a _Taoisech_,
_Tuath_, and _Duthaidh_.[183] The first is the _Triocha Ceud_ of Ceara,
and over it were three kings, O’Muireadhaigh, O’Gormog, and
O’Tighernaigh. It seems to have been exceptionally large. Then we have
five districts termed _Taoisidheacht_. The first is that of O’h-Uada and
O’Cinnchnamha. Then that of O’Cearnaigh, containing the twenty-four
Ballys of the termon of Balla, and therefore nearly as extensive as a
_Triocha Ceud_, but the expression Termon indicates it as being church
land. Then that of Ui Ruadin and of him is the _Dudhchus_ of O’Culachan.
Then that of O’Birn and that of O’Gorrmghiolla, the latter containing
seven Ballys and a half, or the fourth part of a _Triocha Ceud_. Then
there are three _Tuaths_ mentioned. First the _Tuath_ of Partraighe,
co-extensive with the parish of Ballyovey. Of this _Tuath_ we have two
accounts. The first shows us the _Ri tuath_ and the _Taoisech_ distinct,
for O’Gaimiallaigh was its _Ri_ and O’Dorchaidhe its _Taoisech_. By the
second account it was the _Taoisigheacht_ of O’Dorchaidhe alone. O’Banan
of Bally Ui Banan and Magilin of Muine were two _Mac Oglaichs_ or
inferior chiefs. The _Tuath_ of Magh na bethighe contained the seven
Ballys of Lughortan, the _Duthaidh_ of Mac an Bhainbh. The _Tuath_ of
Magh Fhiondalbha, containing fifteen Ballys or half a _Triocha Ceud_,
was the _Duthaidh_ of O’Cearnaigh. Then twelve _Duthaidhs_ or Estates
are given, all connected with surnames. Of these seven consist of one
Bally only. The _Duthaidh_ of O’h-Edhneachan consisted of three
divisions, each containing three Ballys. The _Duthaidh_ of O’Faghartaigh
contained three Ballys, and that of O’Caomhan containing the seven
Ballys of Roslaogh. All of these tribes possessed a common origin with
one exception, for it is added ‘that there was found no _Tuath_ without
its hereditary proprietor of the race of Earc Culbhuidhe except this
well-known _Tuath Aitheachda_,’ that is, tribe of the older subjected
inhabitants, called _Tuath Ruisen_, the old name of Roslaog.[184]

The Tribes and Customs of Hy Many, another great district of Connaught,
throw further light on the subject. This district was considered to be a
third part of the province of Connaught, and the patrimony of the _Clann
Ceallaigh_ or O’Kellys. In a tract giving an account of its boundaries
we are told that it consisted of ‘seven _Tricha_, seven _Tuaths_, seven
_Ballys_, and seven half _Ballys_;’[185] and in the tract called the
‘Customs of Hy Many’ we read: ‘These are the tributaries of the _Clann
Ceallaigh_: the O’Duibhginns, the O’Geibhennaighs, the MacCathails, the
MacFloinns, Muintir Murchadhan, and the Clann Aedhagain, until they
become Ollamhs to the _Ardri_ or head of the whole race. These seven
tributaries correspond with the seven _Tricha_;’ and it is added, that
‘the third part of the _Cuigid_ or province of Connaught, that is, Hy
Many, is to be their _Duthaidh_ for ever.’ They have also the
‘marshalship of the forces’ (_Marasgalacht a Sluag_), as _Saer clann_ or
free tribes, and they are freed from the _Sluaged_, or hostings of
spring and autumn. The seven _Tuaths_ were apparently smaller divisions,
and corresponding with them we have ‘the seven _Oirrighi_ or sub-kings
of Hy Many, viz., O’Conaill, and he has the same patrimony as Mac
Chnaimhin and O’Dubhurrla; the _Oirrighs_ of the _Sil Anmchadha_ are the
O’Madudhains; the _Righs_ or rather _Oirrighs_ of Maenmaigh are the
Muintir Neachtain and the O’Maelallaidhs; the six _Soghans_ with their
_Tricha_; to whomsoever of them they cede the lordship he is called
_Oirrigh_ during his lordship,’ and this makes up the seven.
Corresponding with the seven _Ballys_ we find that ‘the seven _Flaiths_
of Hy Many are these, viz., Mac Eidhigan, _Flath_ of Clann Diarmada;
MacGelli-Enan, _Flath_ of Clann Flaithemael and of the Muintir Chinait;
the _Flaith_ of Clann Bresail is the Muintir Domhnallan, and the
_Flaith_ of Clann Duibgind is O’Duibgind, and O’Gabhrain is over Dal
n-Druithne, and O’Docomhlan over Rinnna h-Eignide, and O’Donnchadha over
Aibh Cormac Maenmuighe, and O’Mailbrigdi is _Flath_ of Bredach.’ The
seven half _Ballys_ correspond with the seven principal _Comharbas_ of
Hy Many, and were the lands attached to seven churches. We have then the
following curious account of the termination of the tribal system in Hy
Many. An agreement is entered into in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, on
the 6th of August 1589, between ‘the Irish chieftains and inhabitants of
Imany called the O’Kellie’s country,’ consisting of, first, the O’Kelly
or head of the race; two O’Kellys, competitors for the name of
Tanistshippe of O’Kelly; two other O’Kellys, and different chiefs
bearing the names of O’Mannine, O’Concannon, O’Naghten, Mac Keoghe,
O’Murry, O’Fallone, and Mac Gerraghte. It is there stated that ‘the
territory of Imany, called O’Kelly’s Country, is divided into five
principal barronyes, all which contain 665-1/2 quarters of land, each at
120 acres;’ and they agree ‘that the Captainshippe and Tanistshippe of
the said country, heretofore used by the said O’Kellys, and all
elections and Irish customary division of lands, shall be utterly
abolished and extinct for ever.’ The O’Kelly is to have four quarters of
land then in his possession, with a chief-rent out of other lands during
his life, and the other two O’Kellys four quarters each.[186]

The third great district or _Mortuath_ of Connaught was that called
‘West, or H-Iar Connaught, the country of the O’Flahertys,’ and in
connection with it we have a tract on the ‘territories of the hereditary
proprietors of Muintir Murchadha of Clanfergail and Meadruidhe and Hy
Briuin Seola and Hy Briuin Ratha and Muintir Fathy; their _Toiseachs_
and high _Mac Oglachs_ and _Ollaves_, that is, O’Halloran is _Toiseach_
of the twenty-four Ballys of Clanfergail (or nearly a _Triocha Ceud_),
and of these are O’Antuile and O’Fergus of Roscam. Mac Cingamain and Mac
Catharnaigh are the two _Toiseachs_ of Meadruidhe, having each their own
people of the tribe subject to them. O’Dathlaoich is the _Toiseach_ of
the fourteen Ballys of the Hy Briuin Ratha (or half a _Triocha Ceud_),
and of these are the O’Kennedies and the O’Duinns and the O’Innogs of
Cnoctuadh and O’Laighin of Lackagh and O’Callanan, Comharba of
Kilcahil,’ the latter being an ecclesiastical sept occupying church
land. ‘O’Canavan was medical Ollamh of O’Flaherty in the _Tuath_ of
Toibrineadh, but others say it was O’Laighidh. The _Flaith_ or chiefs of
Hy Briuin Seola, with their correlatives, are O’Fechin, O’Balbhain,
O’Duff, and O’Madudhain.’ This last tribe does not appear united under
one head but broken up into septs. ‘O’Flaharty is _Toiseach_ of the
fourteen Ballys of Muintir Fathy, with their correlatives under them.’
We have then a list of the hereditary office-bearers of O’Flaherty,
which it may be useful to insert as showing that this designation of
_Toiseach_ was not only applied to the hereditary leaders of tribes, but
when coupled with a qualifying word designated a hereditary officer;
thus Mac Gillagannain of Moyleaslainn is _Toiseach scuir_, or Master of
the Horse to O’Flaherty. The O’Colgam of Bally Colgan are
standard-bearers (_go m-brataigh_) of O’Flaherty. MacGinnain is the
_Comharba_ of Kilcoona. O’Maelampaill of Donaghpatraic is the _Brehon_
or judge of O’Flaherty. O’Cleircin of Rathbuidbh, O’Laibacain, and
O’Maoilin, are the _Erenachs_ of Cillbile. The O’Dubains are the
attendants (_Lucht Comhideachta_) of O’Flaherty at his common house. The
MacKilkellys are the Ollamhs of O’Flaherty in history and poetry, and
for this they have three half Ballys. O’Domnall of Ardratha is the
_Toiseach Comoil_, or Master of the Feast of O’Flaherty, with his own
correlatives under him—viz., O’Daigean of Ardfintain, who was
O’Domhnall’s steward (_Reachtaire_), and O’Chichearan of Lis-chicheran,
and O’Conlachtna of Ballyconlachtna, are the _Beachadoir_, or
beekeepers, of O’Flaherty. O’Murgaile of Muinne-inradain is the high
steward (_Ardreachtaire_) of O’Flaherty.’[187] The king of Connaught,
the head of the O’Connors, had similar officers; for we are told by
O’Ferrall, in his Book of Pedigrees, under the O’Conor family, ‘that the
king of Connaught kept twelve prince officers of the chief families of
his country in his court, attending his person as his council, and to
rule and govern as well his household as to manage the affairs of his
kingdom in war and peace, and were called in Irish _Taoisigh na
Cruachan_, or Toiseachs of Cruachan, the royal residence, which officers
were hereditary from father to son. These chief lords had from the king
certain subsidies for their services.’[188]

These are given in detail in an ancient tract among the Stowe MSS.
Four of them—viz., O’Flanagan, MacGerachty, O’Finnachty, and
O’Maolbrennan—were termed royal _Taoiseachs_, and had each a subsidy
of fifty milch cows and fifty sheep at Beltane, and fifty heifers and
fifty pigs at Samheinn, as well as a domain of forty-eight Ballys; and
of these officers, O’Flannagain had the high stewardship
(_Ardmaoraidacht_), O’Feorinachtaigh was the Hostiarius or doorkeeper,
and O’Maolbrennan was joint steward, and commanded the bodyguards. The
other eight _Toiseachs_ of inferior rank had a domain of twenty-four
_Ballys_ each, and of these O’Hanly had the guardianship of hostages
and prisoners, O’Floinn the stewardship of the horse (_Maoras Each_),
O’Flaithbertaigh and O’Maille the command of the fleet, MacDiarmad was
high marschal, O’Teige was _Taoiseach Teaghlach_ or marshal of the
household, and O’Kelly was _Taoiseach Seud_ or steward of the
jewels.[189]

The province of Ulster likewise presents us with the _Tuath_ or tribe,
several of which form a larger territory equivalent to the Mortuath.
Thus a vast territory, consisting of the two districts of the Route and
Glynnes, was granted by James I. in 1603 to the Earl of Tyrone, and was
at that time subdivided into sixteen smaller districts termed _Tuoghs_
or _Tuaths_, which are recited in the patent. The Route, which was
co-extensive with the ancient territory of Dalriada—from which name
indeed the modern word Route is a corruption—contained nine _Tuoghs_.
These were the _Tuogh_ between the Bandy or Bann and the Boys or Bush,
containing six parishes; the _Tuogh_ of Dunseverick and Ballenatoy; the
_Tuogh_ of Ballelagh; the _Tuogh_ of Loughgill; the _Tuogh_ of
Ballemoney and Dromart, containing two parishes; the _Tuogh_ of
Killeoconway (_Coil na g-Connmuigh_), or the wood of O’Conway; the
_Tuogh_ of Killioquin, or the wood of O’Conn; the _Tuogh_ of
Killiomorrie, or the wood of O’Murry; and the _Tuogh_ of Magheredunagh
(_Machaire Dun Eachdach_), or plain of the fort of Eachdach, consisting
of the parish now called Dunaghy. The district of the Glynnes consisted
of seven baronies, six of which are termed _Tuoghs_. These were the
_Tuogh_ of Munerie, the _Tuogh_ of Carey, the _Tuogh_ of Glenmiconogh,
the _Tuogh_ of the Largie, the _Tuogh_ of the Parke, and the _Tuogh_ of
the Larne. The entire acreage of the two districts of the Route and the
Glynnes was 333,907 acres, giving an average of 20,869 acres to each.

The names of the tribes which were connected with these _Tuoghs_ or
_Tuaths_ have not been preserved, but they are still retained in the
district of North Clandeboy, which with South Clandeboy represented the
ancient Dalnaraighe or territory of the Picts of Ulster. We find from an
inquisition in 1605 that North Clandeboy consisted of twenty
subdivisions, thirteen larger and seven smaller; the former are termed
_Tuoghs_ or _Tuaths_, and are named after the tribes occupying them.
These are the _Tuogh_ of Clanaghartie, containing the entire parish of
Kilconriola and part of Ahoghill, and the _Tuogh_ of Muntir Callie
(_Muintir Ceallaigh_), or the tribe of Kelly, containing the rest of
Ahoghill parish. These two together formed the barony of Lower Toome,
and contained 36,000 acres. The _Tuogh_ of Muntir Rividy, and the _Tuogh
na Fuigh_. These two formed the barony of Upper Toome, and contained
64,000 acres. The _Tuogh_ of Muntir Murigan (_Muintir Mhuireagan_), or
the tribe of Murrigan. The _Tuogh na Keart_. The _Tuogh_ of Moylinny,
which is co-extensive with the barony of Upper Antrim, and contained
36,000 acres. The _Tuogh_ of Killelagh. The _Tuogh_ of Maghery-morne,
the _Tuogh_ of Braden Iland, and the _Tuogh_ of Ballinlyny. These three
formed the barony of Lower Belfast, and contain 56,000 acres. The _Tuogh
Cinament_, containing part of the parish of Shankill, and the _Tuogh_ of
the Fall, containing the rest of Shankill and the parish of
Drumbeg.[190]

We have then a very instructive account of the counties of Monaghan and
Fermanagh in a letter addressed by Sir John Davis, Attorney-General of
Ireland, to the Earl of Salisbury in the year 1606. He states that
Monaghan, otherwise called M‘Mahon’s country, ‘was divided into five
baronies, viz., Dartry, Monaghan, Cremorne, Trough, and Donamayne; that
these five baronies contain an hundred Ballybetaghs, viz., Dartrey 21,
Monaghan 21, Cremorne 22, Trough 15, and Donamayne 21.’ These obviously
represent _Tuaths_, four being about two-thirds, and the fifth the half
of a _Triocha Ceud_. He then proceeds to tell us ‘that every
_Ballibetagh_ (which signifieth in the Irish tongue a town able to
maintain hospitality) containeth 16 _taths_, each _tath_ containeth 60
English acres or thereabout; so as every _Ballibetagh_ containeth 960
acres, the extent of the whole containing 100 _Ballibetaghs_ is 96,000
acres, besides the church lands.’ This territory having been forfeited
to the Crown, four of the baronies were thus regranted to the M‘Mahons.
‘In the Dartrey five _Ballibetaghs_ were granted in demesne to Bryan
McHugh Oge McMahon, then reputed chief of his name, and the heirs-male
of his body, rendering £30 rent, viz., £6 for each _Ballibetagh_; the
other 16 _Ballibetaghs_ were divided among the ancient inhabitants of
that barony, some having a greater portion allotted and some a less;
howbeit every one did render a yearly rent of 20s. out of every _tath_,
whereof 12s. 6d. was granted to Bryan McHugh Oge McMahon as a chief rent
in lieu of all other duties, and 7s. 6d. was reserved to the Crown;
which plot was observed in every of the other baronies, so as out of
every _Ballibetagh_ containing 16 _taths_ the lord had £10 and the king
£6. In Monaghan, Ross Bane McMahon had likewise five _Ballibetaghs_
granted unto him, with the like estate, rendering to the queen £30 rent,
and the like chief rent out of nine _Ballybetaghs_ more, and in the same
barony Patrick McArt Moyle had three _Ballybetaghs_ allotted unto him
with the like estate, rendering £18 rent to the queen, and the like
chief rent out of the other four.

‘In Cremorne, Ever McColla McMahon had five _Ballybetaghs_ in demesne
granted unto him, and the heirs-male of his body, rendering £30 rent to
the Crown, and the like chief rent out of twelve other _Ballybetaghs_;
and in the same barony one Patrick Duffe McColla McMahon had two
_Ballybetaghs_ and a half assigned to him in demesne, rendering £15
rent, and the like chief rent out of two other _Ballybetaghs_ and a
half.

‘In the _Tuough_, containing only fifteen _Ballybetaghs_, Patrick
McKenna had three _Ballybetaghs_ and twelve _taths_ in demesne, given
unto him, with the like estate, rendering £22 rent as aforesaid, and the
like chief rent out of seven other _Ballybetaghs_; and in the same
barony one Bryan Oge McMahowne, brother to Hugh Roe, had the like estate
granted unto him in three _Ballybetaghs_, rendering £18 rent in like
manner, and the like chief rent out of two other _Ballybetaghs_.’

These grants no doubt reflect the ancient occupation of the district,
the various returns in kind and in service being commuted for a money
payment, and the holdings being made direct from the Crown, part of each
barony being held in demesne by the chiefs, and the rest by what Sir
John calls the inferior inhabitants, who had, he says, likewise ‘their
demesne and rents allotted to them, and their several portions of land
granted unto them and to their heirs.’ Besides these temporal lands
there were, he says, ‘the spiritual lands, which the Irish call
_Termons_, which were granted to sundry servitors rendering 10s. to the
Crown for every _tath_; which out of all the church lands amounted to
£70 per annum or thereabouts,’ that is, to 140 _taths_, equal to about
nine _Ballybetaghs_.

From the return with regard to the county of Fermanagh we obtain similar
information, with some additional particulars deserving of notice. ‘For
the lands of inheritance in Fermanagh,’ otherwise called Maguire’s
Country, he says, ‘they stood not in the same terms as the lands in
Monaghan. For the signorie or chiefry and the demesne lands, that were
the inheritance of MacGuire himself, were reduced and vested in the
Crown.’... But forasmuch as the greatest part of the inhabitants of that
country did claim to be freeholders of their several possessions, who,
surviving the late rebellion, had never been attainted, so as we could
not clearly entitle the Crown to their land;’ and he adds, that ‘they
held the same not according to the course of common law but by the
custom of tanistry, whereby the eldest of every sept claimed a chiefry
over the rest, and the inferior sort divided their possessions after the
manner of gavelkind.’ Sir John tells us that, ‘First we thought it meet
to distinguish the possessions, next to inquire of the particular
possessors thereof. Touching the possessions,’ he says, ‘we found
Fermanagh to be divided into seven baronies, viz., Magheryboy,
Clanawley, Clankelly, Maghery, Stephanagh, Tirkennedy, Knockrinie, and
Lough Lurgh. Every of these baronies contains seven _Ballybetaghs_ and a
half of land, chargeable with McGuire’s rent, and other contributions of
the country. Every _Ballybetagh_ is divided into four quarters of land,
and every quarter into four _taths_, so as a _Ballybetagh_ containeth
sixteen _taths_, as it doth in Monaghan, but the measure of this country
is far larger; besides the freeland, whereof there is good quantity in
every barony, is no parcel of the seven _Ballybetaghs_ and a half,
whereof the barony is said to consist. For these reasons Fermanagh,
containing but fifty-one _Ballybetaghs_ and a half of chargeable lands,
is well-nigh as large an extent as Monaghan, which hath in it an hundred
_Ballybetaghs_.’

‘Touching the freeland we found them,’ he says, ‘to be of three kinds—

‘1. Church land or _termon_ lands, as the Irish call it.

‘2. The mensal land of McGuire.

‘3. Land given to certain septs privileged among the Irish, viz., the
lands of the chroniclers, rimers, and gallo-glasses.

‘The Church land was either monastery land, _Corbe_ land, or _Erenach’s_
land. The monastery land lay in the barony of Clanawley, and did not
exceed two _Ballybetaghs_, but the lands belonging to the _Corbes_ and
_Erenachs_ are of far greater quantity, and are found in every barony.
They told me,’ he adds, ‘that the word _Termon_ doth signify in the
Irish tongue a liberty or freedom, and that all church lands whatsoever
are called _termon_ lands by the Irish, because they were ever free from
all impositions and cuttings of the temporal lords, and had the
privilege of sanctuary.’

McGuire’s mensal lands, he tells us, were ‘free from all common charges
and contributions of the country, because they yielded a large
proportion of butter and meal and other provisions for McGuire’s table,
‘and that though lying in several baronies did not in quantity exceed
four _Ballybetaghs_, the greatest thereof being in the possession of one
M‘Manus and his sept.’ The certainties of the duties or provisions
yielded unto McGuire out of these mensal lands were set forth in an old
parchment roll in the hands of one O’Brislan, a chronicler and principal
_Brehon_ of that country. It was not very large, but was written on both
sides in a fair Irish character, and contained not only ‘the certainty
of McGuire’s mensal duties, but also the particular rents and other
services which were answered to McGuire out of every part of the
country.’ ‘Besides these mensals,’ he adds, ‘McGuire had two hundred and
forty beeves or thereabouts yearly paid unto him out of the seven
baronies, and about his castle at Iniskillen he had almost a
_Ballybetagh_ of land, which he manured with his own churles. And this
was McGuire’s whole estate in certainty, for in right he had no more,
and in time of peace did exact no more. In time of war he made himself
owner of all, cutting what he listed, and imposing as many _bonachts_ or
hired soldiers upon them as he had occasion to use. Concerning the free
land of the third kind—viz., such land as is possessed by the Irish
officers of this country, viz., chroniclers, galloglasses, and
rimers—the entire quantities if it were laid down together, as it is
scattered in sundry baronies, doth well-nigh make two _Ballybetaghs_ and
no more.’[191]

This presents us with a graphic enough account of the state of the Irish
tribe as it existed at the time Sir John Davis wrote; and we may
supplement what he says as to the position of the _Termon_ or Church
lands, and their freedom from the burdens to which the other lands were
subject, by two charters preserved in the Book of Kells. The first is a
grant by Conchobhar O’Maelsechlann, king of Meath, in the eleventh
century, by which he gave Kildelga with its territory and lands to God
and to Columkille for ever, free of all claim for _Cis_ or rent,
_Cobach_ or tribute, _Fecht_ and _Sluaged_ or expedition and hosting,
and _Coinnim_ from king or _Toiseach_, and the precise signification of
_Coinnim_ appears from the second charter granted in the succeeding
century, by which the freedom of Ardbreacain was granted by Muirchertach
O’Lochlainn, king of Ireland, Diarmaid O’Maelsechlann, king of Meath,
and Aedh Mac Cu-Uladh, king of Laeghaire. The people of Laeghaire had a
certain tribute on the Church, viz., one night’s _Coinnmeda_ every
quarter of a year. O’Lochlain, king of Ireland, and O’Maelsechlann, king
of Meath, induced the king of Laeghaire to sell this night’s _Coinnmeda_
for three ounces of gold. The Church, therefore, with its territory and
lands, is free for two reasons, viz., on account of the general freedom
of all churches, and on account of this purchase.’[192]

We thus see that the leading features of the Irish tribes, as we have
gathered them in the ancient laws, can to a great extent be recognised
in the state of the native population of the country, as we find it
presented to us at a later period in four of her great provinces.




                               CHAPTER V.

          THE FINÉ OR SEPT IN IRELAND, AND THE TRIBE IN WALES.


[Sidenote: Origin of the _Finé_ or Sept.]

Among the changes produced in the social organisation of the tribe by
external influence and internal progress, not the least striking was the
gradual development within it of the _Finé_ or septs. Though the word
_Finé_ is undoubtedly used for the whole confraternity of the members of
the tribe, viewed as a community united together by a supposed common
origin, yet, in its strict technical sense, it was applied to those
divisions of the tribe which may be called septs or clans.

As soon as the superior advance of some members of the tribe over the
others in wealth and importance produced a relation of superior and
dependant by the latter becoming _Ceile_ or tenants of the former, while
their possessions became hereditary in their families, the germ of the
_Finé_ or sept was formed. When the _Boaire_, or cow-lord, was led by
wealth in cattle to give over the excess of his stock to other members
of the tribe, who became his _Ceile_ or dependants, a _Finé_ in its most
restricted sense was formed, and the _Aire Coisring_, as he was called,
became also the _Aire Finé_, or head of an inferior sept.[193]

[Sidenote: The _Ciné_ or kinsfolk.]

The acquisition of part of the tribe land as the absolute property of
individuals, and their advance as wealthy land as well as cattle owners,
led to its further development. The _Aire_ who owned an estate in land
which raised him to the position of a _Flath_ or chief, and was enabled
to transmit it to his descendants, led to the settlement of his family
and kinsfolk on the land. He was not considered as fully entitled to the
privileges of a territorial lord unless his father and grandfather had
likewise been an _Aire_; and when three generations had thus been
settled on the land, the offshoots of these generations formed a group
consisting of the nearest agnates of the chief, which would increase in
number as the generations went on. These were the _Ciné_, or kinsfolk of
the head of the tribe, and to them were added those freemen of the tribe
who claimed a common origin with them, and who placed themselves under
the chief as his _Ceile_ or dependants.

[Sidenote: The _Ceile_ or tenants.]

The same causes which operated in the feudal system to lead the odal
proprietors to commend themselves to an overlord as his vassals, and
gradually extinguished the more ancient class of independent
landholders, tended likewise in the Irish tribal system to absorb the
original freemen of the tribe in the class of the _Ceile_ or dependants
of the chief, and thus to add to his following and to form a constituent
part of the _Finé_ or sept.

With the _Saor Ceile_, or free dependants, the basis was a mutual
contract for a fixed period usually of seven years, by which the _Flath_
or chief gave a portion of stock proportionate to the food-rent he was
to receive in return, and was entitled along with this to the homage of
the tenant during the subsistence of the contract, and to a certain
amount of service in the erection of a _Dun_ or fort, the reaping of his
harvest, and the _Sluaged_ or hosting; but the contract could be
terminated and the parties to it return to their original relation to
each other, either by the _Ceile_ or tenant returning the stock he had
received, or by the _Flath_ reclaiming it. A more permanent connection
was formed between him and the _Daor Ceile_ or bond tenant. Here the
_Ceile_ placed himself formally under the protection of the _Flath_ as
his permanent follower, and this relation was formed by his receiving a
certain number of _Seds_ or cows, by way of subsidy or gift from the
superior, and paying him a certain tribute termed _Sed Taurclothe_, or
returnable _Seds_, as the price of his protection. This servitude was
termed _Aicillne_, and the amount of the _Seds_ was regulated by the
Honor price. As soon as this relation was constituted, he received an
additional amount of stock in proportion to the food-rent he had to
return, in the same manner as in the case of the free _Ceile_.[194] The
real distinction probably was, that in the one case the _Ceile_ was in a
more independent position, and possessed stock of his own as well as a
share of the tribe land, besides what he received from the _Flath_. In
the other he was dependent upon what he received from the _Flath_ for
the whole of his stock. When the _Flath_ reclaimed his stock from the
free _Ceile_, the latter had the option of becoming a bond _Ceile_, if
he preferred doing so to returning his stock, and the _Flath_ was then
bound to add the returnable _Seds_ to the stock he had originally given,
which constituted the relation between him and the _Ceile_ as a
permanent dependant. This process, therefore, not only led to the
freemen of the tribe being gradually absorbed into the class of the
dependants or following of the chief, but placed a powerful weapon in
the hands of the latter, by which he could transform his temporary free
_Ceile_ into permanent and more servile dependants.

[Sidenote: The _Fuidhir_ or stranger septs.]

As the _Flath_, however, increased in wealth and power and his territory
extended, he was not satisfied with drawing his dependants from the
tribe of which he was himself a member, but added to his followers by
settling stranger septs upon his waste lands, and thus still further
augmented his power. These stranger septs formed that class termed
_Fuidhir_, a name which from its resemblance to the word _feud_, and
from the apparent analogy between the position of the _Fuidhir_ with the
vassals of the feudal system, has given rise to much speculation. These
analogies are, however, more apparent than real, and there is probably
no connection whatever beyond casual resemblance between the terminology
of the two systems. In the oldest Glossary, that of Cormac, the term is
applied to the superior instead of the dependant, and the name _Fuithir_
is said to be from _fo thir_, he who gives land (_tir_) to a stranger;
but in the Brehon Laws it is applied to those stranger septs settled
upon the land, and, like all the dependants, consisted of the two
classes of _Saer_ and _Daer_, free and bond, according to the temporary
or permanent character of the connection. With the exception that they
were broken men from stranger tribes instead of members of the same
tribe, their connection with the chief presented the same features with
that of the native _Ceile_. Of these _Fuidhir_ there were said to be
seven classes, ranging from those who had land or wealth and became
detached from their tribe, to those who fled to the chief of another
tribe for protection, and had nothing to give but their labour. The
better class, termed _Fuidhir Grian_, obtained possession of a _Rath_
consisting of the usual five houses, received stock from the _Flath_
similar to that given to the _Ceile_, and had a _Lagenech_ or Honor
price. These formed subordinate septs or _Finé_ under the chief,[195]
and we are told that they ‘do not bear the liability of relationship
unless there be five houses (_Treabba_) to relieve each other. If there
be five houses with complete stock, they share the property of the
_Finé_’ (_Finnteada_), and this is explained in the commentary to mean
that ‘the _Fuidhir gabla_—that is, the _Fodaor_ or natural bondsman
(_Daor_)—does not bear the crimes of his relatives unless he has five
houses to relieve him, that is, five who have stock consisting of a
hundred head of cattle, and unless they belong to one chief. If there be
five men of them, each man having a hundred of cattle, every one of them
obtains his share of the _dibadh_ land of each other, and pays for the
crimes of others, like every free native, that is, when they have the
five stocks of a hundred cattle and are under one chief.[196] The lower
class of _Fuidhir_ were of four kinds, termed _grui_, _gola_, _gabla_,
and _gill de bas_, and consisted of strangers who had lost their land by
wars, or fled from having been guilty of bloodshed, and of hostages
saved from death. Lower than these again were the _Bothach_ or cottiers,
likewise divided into the two classes of _Saer_ and _Daer_ according as
they were either small occupiers of land or were prædial slaves, and
probably were remains of the oldest population of the land.

[Sidenote: Territorial basis of _Finé_.]

The formation of the _Finé_ or sept had thus a territorial basis, and
the possession of the _Deis_ or inheritance land, which gave its owner
the rank of _Aire_, was also essential to his acquiring the privileges
of the chief of a _Finé_. Thus we are told in one of the law tracts that
‘there are four _deis_ rights prescribed for _flaith_ or chiefs. The
ancient protection of the _Tuath_ is his office in the _Tuath_; the
office of _Tuisig_ or leader, or _Tanaist Tuisig_, whichever it be, of
his _Ceile gialnai_ or bond Ceile, his _Saer Ceile_, and his
_Sencleithe_ or ancient adherents; the punishment of every imperfect
service; and the following of _Bothach_ or cottiers and _Fuidhir_, whom
he brings upon his land, because his wealth is greater and better. If
there is service from them to the _Flaith_ during nine times nine years,
they are _Bothach_ and _Fuidhir_, but after that they are ranked as
_Sencleithe_ or old adherents.’[197]

The _Finé_, as thus constituted, was formed of two distinct classes;—one
being members of the same tribe as the _Flath_, and consisted of his own
immediate family and relations, and of his _Saor_ and _Daor Ceile_; the
other of stranger septs and broken men from other tribes, who were
settled on the land, and formed a class of subordinate followers. The
basis was a territorial one; but while the authority and privileges of
the chief were derived from his _deis_, there was likewise a bond of
union between him and the former class, derived from community of blood,
and he added to his territorial rights the natural claim to their
allegiance arising from his position as a hereditary chief of their
_Tuath_, as well as the right to punish imperfect service. The most
important of these services on the part of the _Ceile_ was the duty of
following their chief to war. The Book of Aicill, one of these law
tracts, tells us, ‘A chief may enforce a _Sloiged_ or hosting;’ and the
commentator explains, ‘That is, there is a _smacht_ fine, upon a _Daor
Ceile_ of the _Gradfeine_, that is, of the ranks below the _Aires_, for
not going to it, and for coming away from it; double work upon the _Saor
Ceile_ of the _Grad Feine_ for not going to it, and Honor price for
coming away from it.’ Another and perhaps more ancient tract in the
Brehon Laws gives us likewise a view of the _Finé_. There we are told,
‘These are the divisions of the _Finé_ of each _Flath_ or chief. His
_Fuidhir_, his _Ciniud_ or kinsfolk, his _Gabail fodagniat_ (under which
name his Ceile are comprised), all of whom go by the name of _Flaith
Finé_, or the chiefs _Finé_ or sept.’[198]

[Sidenote: The four families of the _Ciné_ or kinsfolk.]

That division of the _Finé_ which was formed of those of the same tribe
as the _Flath_ or chief consisted of two distinct elements, the first
being the _Ciniud_ or near kinsmen of the _Flath_, and the second of
those of the tribe who became his dependants and followers. The first,
as descended from the original founder of the sept, had hereditary
claims upon his land, as well as duties and privileges derived from kin
to the chief, while the rights and duties of the latter were founded on
contract; and here we come in contact with one of the most difficult and
obscure features of the _Finé_ constitution, viz., that institution by
which the duties and the privileges arising from kindred with the chief
are limited to an artificial group of seventeen persons, which again was
divided into four lesser groups, termed respectively _Geilfiné_,
_Deirbhfiné_, _Iarfiné_, and _Indfiné_. These formed the _Duthaig Finé_,
or the sept in its narrowest sense. The _Geilfiné_ consisted of five
persons, and each of the others of four, making seventeen in all. Upon
these four groups of kinsmen appears, in the first place, to have been
imposed a joint responsibility for each member of it. Thus, we find in
the Senchus Mor, that ‘the four nearest _Finé_ bear the crimes of each
kinsman of their stock, _Geilfiné_ and _Deirbhfiné_, _Iarfiné_ and
_Indfiné_;[199] and in a commentary on the Senchus Mor, they are termed
‘the four nearest _Finé_ or families,’ that is, ‘because it is four
_Finés_ that sustain the liabilities of every person that is related to
them intimately.’[200] They likewise possessed mutual rights of
succession in the _dibad_ of the chief, or the land which passed to his
kinsfolk. These rights are very elaborately stated in the Book of
Aicill, but it is necessary to give them in detail in order to
understand the nature of this grouping of the kinsfolk. In answer to the
question, ‘What is the reciprocal right among _Finé_?’ we are told that
‘if the _Geilfiné_ division become extinct, three-fourths of the _dibad_
of the _Geilfiné_ shall go to the _Deirbhfiné_, and one-fourth to the
_Iarfiné_ and the _Indfiné_—viz., three-fourths of the fourth to the
_Iarfiné_, and one-fourth of it to the _Indfiné_.

‘If the _Deirbhfiné_ division has become extinct, three-fourths of its
_dibad_ goes to the _Geilfiné_, and one-fourth to the _Iarfiné_ and
_Indfiné_’—that is, three-fourths of the fourth to the _Iarfiné_, and a
fourth of it to the _Indfiné_.

‘If the _Iarfiné_ division has become extinct, three-fourths of its
_dibad_ shall go to the _Deirbhfiné_, and one-fourth of it to the
_Geilfiné_ and _Indfiné_—that is, three-fourths of the fourth to the
_Geilfiné_, and one-fourth of it to the _Indfiné_.

‘If the _Indfiné_ has become extinct, three-fourths of its _dibad_ shall
go to the _Iarfiné_, and one-fourth of it to the _Geilfiné_ and
_Deirbhfiné_—that is, three-fourths of the fourth to the _Deirbhfiné_,
and one-fourth of it to the _Geilfiné_.

‘If the _Geilfiné_ and _Deirbhfiné_ both become extinct, three-fourths
of their _dibad_ shall go to the _Iarfiné_, and one-fourth to the
_Indfiné_.

‘If the _Indfiné_ and _Iarfiné_ both become extinct, three-fourths of
their _dibad_ shall go to the _Deirbhfiné_, and one-fourth to the
_Geilfiné_.

‘If the _Deirbhfiné_ and _Iarfiné_ have both become extinct,
three-fourths of their _dibad_ shall go to the _Geilfiné_, and
one-fourth to the _Indfiné_.

‘If the _Geilfiné_ and _Indfiné_ have both become extinct, three-fourths
of the _dibad_ of the _Geilfiné_ shall go to the _Deirbhfiné_, and
one-fourth of it to the _Iarfiné_; three-fourths of the _dibad_ of the
_Indfiné_ shall go to the _Iarfiné_, and one-fourth to the
_Deirbhfiné_.’

This seems to exhaust all possible combinations, and some provisions
follow which are not very easily understood; but when it is added, ‘And
the whole number of the seventeen men are then forthcoming, and if they
be not, there shall be no partition, but the nearest of kin shall take
it,’ the meaning seems to be that the group of seventeen persons must be
made up in each case, but if that cannot be done, there is no partition
of the _dibad_ to the person nearest in degree to the extinct family.

We are also told that ‘the _Geilfiné_ is the youngest and the _Indfiné_
the oldest,’ and that ‘if one person has come up into the _Geilfiné_ so
as to make it excessive, that is, more than five persons, a man must go
out of it up into the _Deirbhfiné_, and a man is to pass from one _Finé_
into the other up as far as the _Indfiné_, and a man is to pass from
that into the _Duthaig n-Daine_ or community.’[201]

It is exceedingly difficult to form anything like a clear conception of
the true nature of what appears to be so highly artificial an
arrangement, and it is probable that if it ever really existed in its
entirety, it must soon have broken down under the various modifications
which the natural progress of society brought to bear upon the
community. So far as we can gather, there seems undoubtedly to have been
the tie of kindred among themselves, and between them and the chief; and
a portion of the territory of the _Flath_ appears to have been assigned
to them under the name of _dibad_, the portion occupied by each group
being possessed in common by its members, so that it was only when the
subordinate groups became extinct that a redistribution of it took
place.

[Sidenote: Members of the four families.]

Of what members of the _Finé_, then, did each of these groups really
consist? There seems to be no doubt as to the number which formed the
members of each. The _Geilfiné_ consisted of five persons only, who were
nearest of kin to the chief, but these might be found either in the
descending or ascending line, or were, in the strictest sense of the
term, collateral. The descending line was termed _Belfiné_, and the
_Geilfiné_ consisted of the father, the son, the grandson, the
great-grandson, and the great-great-grandson, to the fifth generation.
The ascending line was termed _Culfiné_, or back family, and we are told
that, viewed in this connection, the _Geilfiné_ consisted of the
father’s brother, and his son, to the fifth generation.[202] The
collateral relationship was termed _Taobhfiné_, or side family; and,
according to Mr. O’Donovan and the authorities he refers to, the
_Geilfiné_ is defined as ‘the first or direct family; the father and his
two sons, and two grandsons; collateral tribe.’ The _Deirbhfiné_ as ‘the
second tribe; the next in point of dignity to the _Geilfiné_; the two
grandsons and their two sons.’ The _Iarfiné_ as ‘the after family; two
sons of grandsons and their sons, making four persons;’ and _Indfiné_ as
‘the fourth and lowest division of a tribe.’[203] He does not define the
members of which it consists, but it may be inferred that he held it to
consist of the two sons of great-grandsons and their sons, corresponding
to the five generations of the Brehon Laws.

[Sidenote: The _Geilfiné_ chief.]

The father, who in each case was the head of the _Geilfiné_, is
evidently the person frequently referred to in these Laws as the
_Geilfiné_ chief, and the other four members of this group were
evidently his nearest agnates, according to the position of the family,
but the members of the other three groups, as presented to us in these
Laws, cannot be viewed as his descendants. The _Deirbhfiné_, _Iarfiné_,
and _Indfiné_, were obviously collateral and contemporary with the
_Geilfiné_, otherwise it is impossible that they could, on the one hand,
have been jointly responsible for a kinsman, or, on the other, have
shared in the succession of each as they became extinct; and we can
gather from several expressions in the Laws that such was the case. Thus
we find in the Senchus Mor the seventeen persons are termed relatives,
and are defined in the commentary as ‘kinsmen’ (_Bleogain_),[204] and
these are distinguished as _Tobach_, _Saigi_, and _Bleogain_, or kinsmen
in general.[205] In another commentary these terms are thus defined:
‘_Tobach_, that is, the nearest kinsman, that is, the liability of his
son and grandson. _Saigi_, that is, the middle kinsman, that is, the
liability of a kinsman as far as seventeen. _Bleogain_, that is,
kinsman, that is, the farthest kinsman or _Cin_.’[206] The first
obviously refers to the constituent members of the _Geilfiné_; the
second to the three other groups; and the third to the remainder of the
kin of the chief who did not belong to these artificial groups.

Again, we are told that ‘the tribe property (_Finntiu_) is claimed
backwards; it is divided between three _Finé_; an extern branch stops
it, if the five persons perish. Except as regards the liability of
relationship, if the family become extinct; except a fourth part to the
_Findfiné_. From seventeen men out it is decided that they are not a
_Duthaig Finé_, or tribe community,’ and this is explained in the
commentary to mean that ‘the hereditary right of the _Geilfiné_ group
goes backwards to the _Deirbhfiné_, who have their share of it when it
is divided among the three _Finé_, that is, the _dibad_ land is divided
between the three _Finé_ groups, viz., the _Deirbhfiné_, the _Iarfiné_,
and the _Indfiné_. An extern branch stops it, that is, the branch by
which the land is detained is a branch that is hitherto extern to the
_Geilfiné_, that is, the _Deirbhfiné_.’ The liability of relationship is
explained that, ‘as they share the _dibad_ land, so they shall pay for
the crimes of their relatives.’ It is added that, ‘from the seventeen
men out, it is then they are distinguished, so that they are not a
_Duthaig Finé_ or tribe community, but a _Duthaig n-Daine_, or a
community of people.’[207]

From these notices it is apparent that there underlies the formation of
these groups the idea of five generations. These were expressed by the
terms _Athair_, father, _Mac_, son, _Ua_, grandson, _Earmua_,
great-grandson, _Innua_, great-great-grandson, and that each of the four
groups was one generation less than the other, the _Geilfiné_, or white
family, being the chiefs immediate family, including himself;[208] but
it must not be supposed that these degrees of relationship implied
descent from the same individual, otherwise it would require that the
five generations were alive at the same time. The idea rather is that it
required five generations from the founder of the _Finé_ to complete the
group of seventeen persons. Thus his own immediate family, to the number
of four, constituted his _Geilfiné_. Then as each new person was born
into the _Geilfiné_, the older member passed into a new group termed
_Deirbhfiné_, and this went on till the group extended to nine persons;
then, as new members were born to these two, older members passed into
another group called _Iarfiné_,; and so on, as new generations were
added, till the group of _Indfiné_ was formed, and the whole number of
seventeen was completed, the members of each being fathers and sons, and
representing the fourth and fifth generations from the common ancestor;
and as generations went on, the kin or kinsfolk of the chief passed
through the alembic of these four groups and disappeared into the
commonalty of the _Finé_, leaving always a residuum of seventeen persons
behind them. These relationships, then, meant not descent from the same
individual but from the founder of the _Finé_, and expressed the
distance of each group from the stem-line of hereditary chiefs, and the
degrees of relationship between them and the chief for the time being.
This view of the degrees of relationship, as connected with the five
generations, seems to be implied in one of the regulations regarding
‘_Saer_ stock tenure.’ We are there told that ‘if one chief has received
stock from another, there shall be no returning of the _Saer_ stock
without _Seds_, in that case until one heir transmits to another.’ ‘If
it is from the chief next to him he has taken it, it is grandson upon
grandson, or great-grandson upon great-grandson, or the son of a
great-grandson upon the son of a great-grandson, and the number of
degrees which are between the person who gave the stock and the person
to whom it is given, is the number of relatives who shall claim the
stock without _Seds_ of _Saer_ stock.’[209]

The _Geilfiné_ were thus what was termed youngest cadets; and the
_Indfiné_, the oldest cadets, recognised as forming part of the kin, and
as longest separated from the chief, were the most powerful family next
to his own.

The following table, in which the succession to the _dibad_ land is
included, will show this conception of the nature of these groups:—

 _Common Ancestor,
  Geilfiné Chief_.
       |
       +—————————————————————————- —-+
       |                                                       |
     _Son,                                                   _Son._
  Geilfiné Chief_.                                             |
       |                                                       |
       +—————————————————————-+           |
       |                                           |           |
   _Grandson,                                   _Son._    _Grandson._
 Geilfiné Chief_.                                  |           |
       |                                           |           |
       +———————————-+          |        |           |
       |                       |          |        |           |
 1. _Geilfiné_      |        _Son._       |   _Grandson_.      |_Great-grandson_.
     chief,         |          |          |        |           |        |
  when complete.    |          |          |        |           |        |
       |            |          |          |        |           |        |
     2, 3.          |        6, 7.        |      10, 11.       |     14, 15.
   Two sons.        |         Two         |     Two great-     |       Two
       |            |      grandsons.     |     grandsons.     |   great-great-
       |            |          |          |        |           |    grandsons.
       |            |          |          |        |           |        |
     4, 5.          |        8, 9.        |      12, 13.       |     16, 17.
  Two grandsons.    |    Their two sons.  |  Their two sons.   | Their two sons.
                    |                     |                    |
      GEILFINÉ.     |     DEIRBHFINÉ.     |      IARFINÉ.      |     INDFINÉ.
 —————————-+——————————-+——————————+————————
     If extinct.    |   Obtains 3-4ths.   | 3-4ths of 1-4th.   | 1-4th of 1-4th.
 —————————-+——————————-+——————————+————————
   Obtains 3-4ths.  |      If extinct.    | 3-4ths of 1-4th.   | 1-4th of 1-4th.
 —————————-+——————————-+——————————+————————
  3-4ths of 1-4th.  |        3-4ths.      |    If extinct.     | 1-4th of 1-4th.
 —————————-+——————————-+——————————+————————
  1-4th of 1-4th.   |   3-4ths of 1-4th.  |      3-4ths.       |   If extinct.
 —————————-+——————————-+——————————+————————
    If extinct.     |      If extinct.    |  3-4ths of both.   | 1-4th of both.
 —————————-+——————————-+——————————+————————
   1-4th of both.   |    3-4ths of both.  |    If extinct.     |   If extinct.
 —————————-+——————————-+——————————+————————
   3-4ths of both.  |      If extinct.    |    If extinct.     | 1-4th of both.
 —————————-+——————————=+——————————+————————
    If extinct.     |3-4ths of _Geilfiné_.|1-4th of _Geilfiné_.|  If extinct.
                    | 1-4th of _Indfiné_. |3-4ths of _Infiné_. |
——————————+——————————-+——————————+————————
                  17 men must in this case be made up.
————————————————————————————————————————

It is hardly possible that so complicated a system should have long
remained intact through all the changes produced in the social system of
these tribes by the mere course of time; and it probably, at least to
some extent, broke down under the growing importance of the family of
the oldest cadet, which became more and more independent the longer it
was separated from that of the chief, and so would narrow the group
which formed his kin; and thus we see that as it became the most
powerful family next to his, there came to be alternate election of the
king or chief from these two families, the head of the one being always
nominated Tanist to the other.

[Sidenote: Relation of _Geilfiné_ chief to the _Ri Tuath_.]

Such being probably the nature of these groups, it becomes necessary to
examine their relation to the _Tuath_ and that of the _Flath Geilfiné_
or _Geilfiné_ chief to the _Ri Tuath_. We find in the Senchus Mor the
following statement:—‘The head of each _Finé_, or the _Ceannfiné_,
should be the man of the _Finé_ who is the most experienced, the most
noble, the most wealthy, the wisest, the most learned, the most powerful
to oppose, the most steadfast to sue for profits and for losses.’ The
two qualities of ‘most noble’ in race and ‘most wealthy’ in cattle can
only be found united in the _Flath_ or chief, and he is expected to
possess the rest. We therefore find in the commentary ‘the head of each
_Finé_’ defined to be ‘every one who is head chief of the _Geilfiné_.’
We are then told that ‘every person in a _Tuath_ accepts equal stock or
subsidy from the _Flath Geilfiné_ or _Geilfiné_ chief, and the _Flath
Geilfiné_ accepts stock or subsidy from the _Ri Tuath_, or else every
person in the _Tuath_ accepts it from the _Ri Tuath_, though it is from
him that the _Flath Geilfiné_ takes his _Flaithius_ or chiefship.’[210]
We have here an alternative statement. In the one the members of the
tribe take stock from the _Geilfiné_ chief, that is, are his dependants.
In the other they take stock directly from the _Ri Tuath_. These
statements represent different states of the tribe; the older state,
when the members of the tribe were equal and independent of each other,
and the later when they had become dependent upon the _Flath_ or chief;
but both might exist at the same time, some taking stock from the chief
and some from the king. There was this distinction between the chief and
the king as regards _Saer_ stock tenure, that the connection between the
_Flath_ and the _Ceile_ was based upon contract, and the connection
which was freely entered into might be dissolved by either party; but we
are told in the _Cain tsaorrthadh_ or law of _Saer_ stock tenure, ‘a man
need never accept of _Daer_ stock from any other unless he likes it
himself, and he need not accept even of _Saer_ stock from any but his
own king, and he cannot refuse taking _Saer_ stock from his own king.’
And further, ‘he cannot separate from his own king at any time, either
while he holds by _Saer_ stock tenure or by _Daer_ stock tenure.’[211]
And in the _Cain Aigillne_ or law of _Daer_ stock tenure we read, ‘The
law does not require of a man to accept of _Daer_ stock from his own
chief or from an extern chief, or from his own king or from an extern
king, but the law requires of him to take _Saer_ stock from his own
king. If he takes _Daer_ stock, it should be from his own king.’[212]

This power which the _Ri Tuath_ possessed of forcing the members of the
tribe to become his dependants in _Saer_ stock tenure, and of retaining
them permanently, enabled him to increase his dependants to any extent;
and besides the _Ceile_ whom he thus gathered around him he likewise
settled _Fuidhir_ or stranger septs upon his waste land in proportion to
the extent of his territory and the amount of his wealth. He thus not
only occupied the position of _Ri Tuath_ or king of the tribe, with all
its rights and privileges, but was likewise the _Flath_ or chief of the
most powerful sept within it.

The _Flath Geilfiné_ or _Geilfiné_ chief was likewise the chief of an
entire _Finé_ or sept. This is implied in a passage in the tract ‘Of the
judgment of every crime,’ where we are told that ‘the reason why the
crime goes upon the _Deirbhfiné_ and the _Iarfiné_ before it goes upon
the _Flath_ or chief, is because it is one chief that is over them, the
_Flath Geilfiné_, and he is chief of four _Finés_ or groups.’ Another
passage in the Book of Aicill also shows that he was next in rank and
power to the king, for it apportions the fines for injuring the roads of
a _Tuath_ between the _Ri_ or king and the _Flath Geilfiné_, and adds,
‘What is the reason that there is more due to the _Ri Tuath_ for
injuring his principal road than his by-road, and that there is more due
to the _Geilfiné_ chief for injuring his by-road than his principal
road? The reason is, the principal road is more the peculiar property of
the _Ri Tuath_ than the by-road, and the by-road is more the peculiar
property of the _Flath Geilfiné_ than the principal road.’[213]

Where then are we to recognise the _Flath Geilfiné_ among the _Aires_ of
a _Tuath_ of the _Grad Flath_? The _Geilfiné_ chief, as we see, received
his stock or subsidy direct from the _Ri Tuath_, but there were only two
of the _Aires_ who were in this position, and in this respect the
_Aires_ of a _Tuath_ fall into two divisions. The _Aire Desa_ and the
_Aire Ard_ received their stock from a _Flath_, but the _Aire Tuise_ and
the _Aire Forgaill_ from the _Ri Tuath_ direct, and it is in this latter
division we have to look for the _Flath Geilfiné_. The _Aire Forgaill_
was the highest grade of the _Aires_, and is said to be so named
‘because it is he that testifies (_Fortgella_) to the grades in every
case in which denial of a charge is sought, and because his quality is
superior to that of his fellows;’ while the _Aire Tuise_ is said to be
so called ‘because his race has precedence,’ or, as it may be more
literally rendered, ‘because he is _Tuisech_ or leader from race’
(_Toisech a Ciniul_).[214] The former, as the superior of the two, may
probably be viewed as the _Flath Geilfiné_ or _Geilfiné_ chief, and
exercised the judicial functions of a chief; while the latter, as the
oldest cadet, led the forces of the clan when called out either by the
chief or by the king on a _Sluaged_ or hosting.

[Sidenote: Law of Succession.]

Although the position of _Flath_ or chief of a sept, as well as that of
_Ri Tuath_ or head of the whole tribe, was hereditary in the family but
elective in the person, there can be little doubt that the senior of the
family, as representing the founder of it, was usually elected as
entitled to the position, unless disqualified by some defect mental or
physical, and this principle is recognised in the tract on Succession,
where it is thus laid down:—‘The senior with the _Finé_ or sept, dignity
with the _Flath_ or chief, wisdom with the _Eclais_ or church;’ and this
rule is thus illustrated in the commentary: ‘Ignorance was set aside for
wisdom in the orders of the church. An _Aitech_ or tenant of the _Grad
Feiné_ was set aside for a _Flath_ or chief, a junior was set aside for
the senior, that is, the person who is junior shall rise or walk out of
the kingship or the abbacy or the _Geilfiné_ chiefship before the person
who is senior.’ And again—‘Age is rewarded by the _Feiné_, for where
there are two _Aires_ or lords of the same family who are of equal
dignity and property, the senior shall take precedence.’ And again—‘The
senior is entitled to noble election,’ but ‘if the kings be equally old
and good, lots are to be cast between them respecting the kingship, but
if one of them is older than the other he shall go into it.’ Finally, it
is laid down that ‘the junior shares and the senior is elected,’ and
that ‘it is according to desert they come into power, and it is
according to the goodness of the branch itself and the goodness of the
grade also, and the most worthy person of the branch shall go into it,
that is, the best person of that branch. And the head of all according
to the _dera_ of the _Finé_, that is, that every one who is a head
should be afterwards according to the _Finé_.’

The following commentary on the qualities required in a chief further
illustrates the principles on which the selection is made:—‘The noblest,
that is, in age or in race (_Cenel_). The highest, that is, in grade.
The wealthiest, that is, in ploughing and reaping. The shrewdest, that
is, in wisdom or in mind. The wisest, that is, in learning. Popular as
to compurgation, that is, who has good friends with compurgators, that
is, good friends outside the territory adhering to him. The most
powerful to sue, that is, to prosecute for each of them. The most firm
to sue for profits, that is, of the _dibad_ property. And losses, that
is, liabilities.’ Finally, ‘the body of each is his _Finé_, that is, the
body of each person who is head is his _Finé_. There is no body without
a head, that is, of themselves, over them, according to law.’[215] It
was the operation of this rule that led to brothers being preferred to
sons, and when there was alternate succession the collateral in the same
degree was preferred to the son of his predecessor, as being one degree
nearer to the common ancestor.

[Sidenote: _Sluaged_ or hosting.]

The regulations for compelling attendance upon the _Sluaged_ or hosting
still further illustrate the relations between the king and the chief of
a sept. They are contained in the Book of Aicill, and are as
follows:—‘If a man of the _Grad Flath_, with his _Daer Ceile_, came away
from it (that is, the hosting), or if the _Ceile_ came away from it, if
ordered by the chief, Honor price shall be paid for it, half of which
goes to the king of the province and the other half is divided into
three parts; one third goes to the king who is nearest the king of the
province in upward gradation (that is, the king of a _Mortuath_),
one-third to the _Ri Tuath_ who is over those below, and one-third to
the chiefs and intermediate chiefs (_Flathaibh_) who are between them in
the middle,’ by which latter distinction the two divisions of the
_Aires_ of the _Grad Flath_ are intended.

‘If it was a man of the _Grad Flath_ and one _Ceile_ that came away from
it, Honor price is to be paid for it also; and the share which the
_Ceile_ should pay, if all the _Ceile_ had been concerned in it, is what
he is to pay now, and the remainder is to be paid by him (that is, the
chief), and the same division is made of the half for the king of the
province, and the other half is divided into three parts.’

‘If it was the _Ceile_ themselves that came away from it without the
chief’s leave, the _Smacht_ fine or Honor price, which is due for it, is
to be paid by them; one-third of it goes to the king of the province,
and one-third to the chief whose _Ceile_ came away, and the other third
is to be divided into three parts, one-third of which goes to the king
of the _Tuath_ who is over them, and one third to the chiefs and
intermediate chiefs who are in the middle between them;’ to which is
added, ‘Whenever it is _Smacht_ fine that is paid, it shall be paid
according to the rank of the person who pays it; and whenever Honor
price is paid, it shall be paid according to the rank of the person to
whom it is paid.’

‘What is the reason that there is a greater fine upon the _Grad Flath_
for not going to the hosting than upon the _Grad Feiné_? The reason is,
The hosting or the Dun-building suffers a greater loss from the absence
of the _Grad Flath_ than from that of the _Grad Feiné_, and they are
more needed, and it is right there should be a greater fine upon them.’
‘What is the reason that there is a greater fine imposed upon them for
coming away from it than for not going to it? The reason of it is, It is
more dangerous for the king to be deserted outside in an enemy’s
territory, than that they should not go out with him at first.’[216]

[Sidenote: Fosterage.]

The tie between the chiefs and their dependants was still further
strengthened by the custom of fosterage, by which the children of the
upper classes were intrusted to a family belonging to the inferior ranks
to be brought up and trained along with their own children. This custom
prevailed from an early period among the Irish tribes, but it is obvious
that such an institution could only have arisen after the distinction of
ranks had been fully organised in the tribe. The influence of early
association with the earlier stage in the constitution of the tribe,
when its free members were in a state of independence and equality with
each other, may have led to their regarding the children under age, and
before they had acquired any independent rights and privileges, as
occupying no better position, and so created a sentiment that they ought
to be trained along with the children of a lower rank, long after the
reality which gave rise to the feeling had ceased to exist. Be this as
it may, we find the institution in full operation in these Ancient Laws,
and the regulations connected with it forming part of the Senchus Mor.
According to it there were two kinds of fosterage with the _Finé_ which
had not been annulled—fosterage for affection, and fosterage for
payment. The clothing and the food of the children given to the inferior
families to foster is minutely regulated. Those of the children of the
_Grad Feiné_ were to be black or yellow or grey, and old clothes were to
be worn by the sons of an _Ogaire_, and new by the sons of a _Boaire_.
The sons of an _Aire desa_ were to wear clothes of a different colour
every day, and of two different colours on Sunday, and to have both old
and new clothes. The sons of the superior chiefs were to wear clothes of
two colours every day, both old and new, and new clothes of two colours
on Sunday; while the sons of the _Aire Forgill_, the highest of all, and
of the king, were to have new coloured clothes at all times, and all
embroidered with gold and silver. How far such regulations were ever
practically observed may well be doubted, but those regarding food are
probably enough. Porridge[217] was to be given to them all, but the
materials of which it is made and the flavouring vary according to the
rank of the parents of the children. The sons of the inferior grades are
fed to bare sufficiency on porridge made of oatmeal and butter-milk or
water taken with salt butter. The sons of chiefs are fed to satiety on
porridge made of barley-meal, upon new milk with fresh butter. The sons
of kings are fed on porridge made of flour, upon new milk taken with
honey. The food of all, however, was alike, till the end of a year or of
three years.

The price of the fosterage of the son of an _Ogaire_ is three _Seds_ or
three _Samhaiscs_, that is, three-year-old heifers; and for his daughter
four _Seds_, a _Sed_ in addition being given for the daughter, because
the household arrangements for her accommodation are more extensive than
for the sons. This was the lowest price given, and the _Fer Midbuid_, or
man of the humblest rank, could not perform the fosterage for less. The
boys were to be taught the herding of lambs, calves, kids, and young
pigs, and kiln-drying, combing, and wood-cutting; and the daughters the
use of the quern, the kneading-trough, and the sieve. The price of the
fosterage of the son of a _Boaire_ was five _Seds_, or three cows. The
price of the fosterage of the son of an _Aire_ was ten _Seds_, and
instruction in the usual sciences is given him; that is, the sons were
taught horsemanship, _brann_-playing, shooting, chess-playing, and
swimming; and the daughters sewing and cutting-out, and embroidery. The
price of the fosterage of the son of a king was thirty _Seds_, and the
foster-sons were to have horses in time of races, and the foster-father
was bound to teach them horsemanship.

The relationship thus formed was considered most friendly, and was
connected with the _Geilfiné_ relationship, but the passage which states
it is so obscure that it is difficult to attach a definite meaning to
it. The children remained with the foster-father till the boys were
seventeen and the girls fourteen. The age of the boys was divided into
three periods. The first extended till he was seven years old; the
second from seven to twelve years, and the third till he was seventeen.
During the first period the foster-father might punish him for faults
with castigation, and during the second with castigation without food,
but for his first fault there were to be three threatenings without
castigation, and after the age of twelve he had to make compensation in
the usual way, with regard to which there are many minute regulations.
On the termination of the fosterage the foster-father returned the
children with a parting gift, which was regulated according to the Honor
price; and in return, the foster-son was bound to maintain his
foster-father in sickness or old age, in the same manner as he would
maintain his own father and mother.

Such were the leading features of the system of fosterage as presented
to us in the Senchus Mor.[218]

[Sidenote: Later state of the _Finés_.]

The ancient topographical descriptions of some of the territories in the
three provinces of Munster, Connaught, and Ulster, which have been
printed by the Irish Archæological and Celtic Society, and which have
been already referred to as affording illustrations of the tribe system,
so far as preserved, likewise indicate the existence of the _Finé_ or
sept. Thus in the district of _Corca Laidhe_ in Munster, which consisted
of eight _Tuaths_ or tribe territories, in describing the district of
_Cuil-Cearnadha_, it is added, ‘These are its hereditary tribes
(_Fineadha duchusa_), O’Rothlain its _Toiseach_, and Ua Cuinn, Ua
Iarnain, and Ua Finain,’ three septs. Again, of the country or
_Duthaich_ of Gillamichil, which formed a _Tuath_, we are told, ‘These
were its hereditary leaders (_Oclaich Duthaich_), O’Duibharda,
O’Dunlaing, Oh-Ogain, O’Dubhagan,’ etc. It is unnecessary to go through
the whole of them, or the _Oclaich Duthaich_ of the other _Tuaths_, as
Mr. O’Donovan adds a note which sufficiently explains their relation to
the tribe. He says that these _Oglaich_ ‘were the petty chiefs,
_Kenfinies_ or heads of families,’ properly septs, ‘who held their lands
by the same right of descent from the common ancestor as the chief, or
rather _Toiseach_, himself; and they were called ’_Oglaich_, young
heroes, because they were bound to assist him in his wars against his
enemies at the heads of their respective clans.’[219]

We have some information, too, regarding the _Finé_ or sept in
Connaught. Thus in the ‘Tribes and Customs of Hy Fiachraich’ we read
that Fiachra, son of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin, _Ardri_ of Erin, colonised
this district, and had a son, Amhalgaidh, from whose son, Fedhlim,
sprang the _Cineal Fedhlimidh_, which consisted of ‘O Ceallachain, O
Caithniadh, Mac Coinin, O Muimhneachain, Mac Fhionain, O Gearadhain,
O’Conboirne. These are the _Cineal Fedhlimidh_ of Jorrus.’ The _Cineal
Feidhlimidh_ here is the tribe occupying a _Tuath_, and the others are
the _Finé_ or septs of which it was composed. Then from ‘Aongus, son of
Amhalgaidh, came the Cineal Aongusa in Hy-Amhalgaidh, viz., O
Muireadhaigh, _Taoisig_ of the Lagan.’ Here we have the _Taoisech_ at
the head of the _Cineal_ or tribe, and then we are told that ‘of the
descendants of Aongus are the people of _Dun Finne_, or fort of the
_Finé_, viz. O Cuinn, MagOdhrain, O Comhdhan, O’Duibhlearga, O Bearga, O
Blighe, O Duanma or Duanmaigh;’ and these were the _Finé_ or septs.
Amhalgaidh had other sons by Earca, daughter of Eochaidh, king of
Leinster, the eldest of whom was Fergus, and his son Muireadhach was
_Rig Ua n-Amhalgaidh_, or king of Hy-Amhalgaidh. The descendants of this
Muireadhach possessed ‘the _Triocha Ceud_ of Bac and of Gleann
Nemthinne, and the half _Triocha Ceud_ of Breudach. These are the
hereditary tribes (_Fineadhoigh Dudhchusa_) of Bac, viz., O Lachtna,
_Taoisioc_ of the two Bacs and of the Gleann, and of them O Dubhagain
and the Clann Firbisigh, O Maoilruaidh of Ardachaidh, and O’Cuimin of
Lios Cuimin on the Muaidh. These are the families or septs (_Fineada_)
of Breudach, viz., O Toghda, Taoiseach of Breudach, O Glaimin, O
Luachaidh, and O Gilin.’[220] Here we have two groups of _Finé_ or
septs, with a _Toisech_ at the head of each. Lastly, from Aongus Fionn,
another son of Amhalgaidh, are O’Gaibhtheachan, O’Flainn, and
O’Maoilhiona, chiefs (_Flaithe_) of Calraighe Muighe h-Eleag.

In one of MacFirbis’s tracts he deduces the tribes and septs descended
from Brian, the son and successor of Eochaidh Muighmeadoin, king of
Connaught. He is said to have had ‘twenty-four sons, and from Echean,
one of them, descended the _Cinel n-Echean_ or tribe of Echean,
consisting of the septs of O’Biasta, O’Bli, O’Caisleorach, O’Ruanuidhen,
and O’Fionnucain. From Fergus came the _Cinel Fergusa_ of Echtge,
consisting of the septs of O’Brain, O’Bruachain, O’Conrethe, and
O’Cairriodha, _Taoiseachs_ of Cinel Fergusa. From Erc Dearg, or the Red,
came the _Cinel Deirg_ in Connaught; from Esse or Essile came the Tuath
Esille; from Aongus are the _Cinel n-Aongusa_ of Galway, that is, the
O’Hallorans with their branches; from Tenedh the _Corco-Tenedh_, and
Muichead, from whom _Corco-Muichead_; from Cana, the O’Cananans in
Uaithne; Neachtain, from Tir Neachtain, with their septs
(_Fineadhaibh_); two Carbrys, viz., Carbry Conrith, from whom is
descended St. Barry of Corc, and Carbry Aircheann, from whom the Hy
Briuin Ratha in West Connaught; three Conalls, viz., Conall Oirisin,
from whom the men of Umalia, Conall Glun, from whom the O’Monahans,
_Taoiseachs_ of the three _Tuaths_, and Conall Cortaine, from whom the
O’Maolduibh; Eochaidh, from whom the Cinel n-Eachach; and Enna Eamalach,
from whom Cinel n-Eanna; Duach Galach, the youngest, from whom the kings
of Rath Cruachan are descended.’[221]

In the province of Ulster we find, besides the _Tuaths_ which formed the
subdivisions of the larger districts and were equivalent to the tribe
territories, that in some a smaller division is mentioned termed a
_Cinement_. Thus in the district of the Glynnes, consisting of seven
subdivisions, six are termed _Tuoghs_ or _Tuaths_, and one is the
‘_Cynamond_ of Armoy and Raghlin,’ containing the parish of Armoy and
the island of Rathlin. Again, among the _Tuoghs_ in North Clandeboy we
find the ‘_Cinament_ of Knockboynabrade;’ the ‘_Cinament_ of Duogh
Connor,’ containing the sixteen towns of Connor; the _Cinament_ of
Kilmahevet; the _Cinament_ of Ballinowre, represented by the modern
parish of Ballinowre, and containing 8000 acres; the _Cinament_ of
Carntall, Monksland, and Carnemony; the _Cinament_ of Dirrevolgie,
_alias_ Fealaogh; and the _Cinament_ of Clandermot, containing four
Ballys or townlands.[222] This word Cinament is derived from _Cine_, a
sept, and _Minand_, a habitation or residence, and these smaller
districts were obviously the possessions of septs or _Finés_ which had
become detached from their tribe, and thus we find the name of the Clan
Dermot connected with one of them. Again, we find the Barony of Lower
Castlereagh in South Clandeboy consisted of five smaller territories
termed Slut Henrickies, Slut Kellies, Slut Hugh Bricks, Slut Bryan Boye,
Slut Durnings, and Slut Owen mac Quin, the last two forming one
district; but this word _Slut_ is the Irish _Sliocht_ or sept, and the
names are corrupted from _Sliocht Enri Caoich_, or the sept of Henry the
Blind; _Sliocht Ceallaigh_, or sept of the Kellies; _Sliocht Aodh
breac_, or sept of Hugh the Freckled; _Sliocht Briuin buidhe_, or sept
of Brian the Yellow; _Sliocht Owen mhic Cuinn_, or sept of Owen son of
Conn.[223]

Sir John Davis, in his Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, written about
the same time, gives us a very clear account of the position of these
septs in the counties of Fermanagh and Cavan. In Fermanagh he derived
his information from certain of the clerks or scholars of that country,
who knew all the septs and families and their branches, and the dignity
of one sept above another, and what families or persons were chief of
every sept, and who were next, and who were of third rank, and so forth,
till they descended to the most inferior man in all the barony.
Moreover, they took upon them to tell ‘what quantity of land every man
ought to have by the custom of their country, which is of the nature of
gavelkind, whereby, as their septs or families did multiply, their
possessions have been from time to time divided and subdivided, and
broken into so many small parcels as almost every acre of land had a
several owner, who termeth himself a lord and his portion of land his
country.’ ‘Notwithstanding, as McGuire himself had a chiefry over all
the country, and some demesne that did ever pass to him only who carried
that title, so was there a chief of every sept who had certain services,
duties, and demesnes that ever passed to the Tanist of that sept, and
never was subject to division.’ And in his return of the state of the
county of Cavan he gives the following general account:—‘In the Irish
countries, where the custom of Tanistry is not extinguished, the tenures
are everywhere alike. There is first a general chieftain of every
country or territory, which hath some demesne and some household
provisions yielded unto him by all the inhabitants under him; every sept
or surname hath a particular chieftain or Tanist, which hath likewise
his peculiar demesne and duties, and these possessions go by succession
or election, entirely without any division; but all the other lands
holden by the inferior inhabitants are partable in course of gavelkind,
wherein there is no difference made between legitimate sons and
bastards.’[224]

[Sidenote: The Tribe in Wales.]

Such, then, being the leading features of the _Tuath_ or tribe, and the
_Finé_ or sept, so far as we can gather them from the Ancient Laws of
Ireland, and as we find them exemplified in the later condition of the
country, which it is essential for our purpose to indicate, we must now
pass over to the mainland of Great Britain, and examine how far we can
likewise trace them in the Ancient Laws of its Welsh population; and
here we see clearly enough that a tribal system possessing in the main
the same characteristics lies at the foundation of their social
organisation. It was likewise modified in the main by the same
influences, but that of the Church was earlier encountered, and it could
hardly escape being affected by another influence to which the Irish
tribe was not exposed, viz., that of the Roman institutions during the
period when the Welsh population formed a part of the Roman province—an
influence, however, which would be more intense in the southern and
eastern districts, and more superficial in the mountainous region of the
west, and in the frontier districts between the Roman walls, whose Welsh
population afterwards formed the kingdom of Strathclyde.

The Welsh codes which have been preserved are those of Gwynedd or North
Wales, and Dyved and Gwent, the west and east divisions of South Wales.
Besides these we have some fragments of Commentaries printed under the
title of Anomalous Laws, and we have also the advantage of possessing a
Latin version of the Laws of Dyved, which gives us the equivalent of the
Welsh terms in the Latin of the feudal charters. The oldest of these
codes are certainly the Laws of Gwynedd or North Wales, and they
recognise the influence of the Church as establishing the sanction of
marriage, requiring legitimacy in the sons, and introducing a law of
primogeniture in the succession to land which did not exist in the Irish
system, when it declares, ‘An innate _Bon-eddig_ is a person who shall
be complete as to origin in Wales both by the mother and by the father.
The ecclesiastical law says again that no son is to have the patrimony
but the eldest born to the father by the married wife.’ The rule was
not, however, universally accepted, for it is added, ‘The law of Howel,
however, adjudges it to the youngest son as well as to the oldest.’[225]

These laws present to us the Cymric people, or Welsh population, who
still maintained their independence, as in a more advanced stage of
organisation than the Irish tribes are exhibited in the Brehon Laws. We
find the land divided into _Talaeth_, or provinces, each under its
_Brenhin_, or king, similarly to that of Ireland, and all under a
_Brenhin penrhaith_, or supreme king; but while we can trace the
original function of the king as judge of his people, the position of
king had assumed a more modern aspect both as relates to his power and
authority, and to his rights in connection with the land. The whole
people are termed the _Cenedl y Gymry_, or race of the Cymry, and we can
see that the organisation of each province was based upon an earlier
tribal system, and that it must have been formed by a confederation of
tribes similar to that of the Irish province. Indications of this
earlier tribal system appear to be contained in ‘The Heads of the Social
State’ attributed to Dyvnwal Moelmud, a mythic king. These tribes appear
as _Llwylh a Cenedl_. We find also the same distinction of the people
into bond and free, _Caithion_ and _Rydyon_, the Latin equivalents of
which were _Nativi_ and _Liberi_, the latter alone representing the
ancient free members of the tribe. These are termed in the Laws
_Boneddic Cancwynawl_. They were pure Cymri both by father and mother,
and the Latin equivalent was _nobilis ingenuus_. The head of the tribe
was the _Pencenedl_, or _prefectus generis_, who is still recognised as
a functionary in these Laws. According to the Triads of the Social
State, the _Pencenedl_ must be the oldest in the _Cenedl_ so far as the
ninth degree of kindred, who is in full strength of body and mind. The
same process which in the case of the Irish tribe had created a class of
territorial lords or _Flaith_, no doubt gave rise to the similar class
whom we find fully developed in the Welsh law. These were the _Uchelwyr_
or _Breyr_, sometimes termed _Mab Uchelwyr_, just as the Irish Flaith
appear as _Mac Oclaich_, and their Latin equivalent was _Optimates_.
When a family succeeded in retaining possession of the same portion of
land for a certain period, they were recognised as proprietors of it,
and entered the class of territorial lords. Thus in the Laws of Gwynedd,
‘Whosoever shall claim land and soil by kin and descent, let him show
his kin and descent from the stock from whence he is derived; and if he
be a fourth man, he is a proprietor because a fourth man becomes a
proprietor;’ and in the Laws of Gwent, ‘a _dadenhudd_ is the tilling by
a person of land tilled by his father before him. In the fourth degree a
person becomes a proprietor,—his father, his grandfather, his
great-grandfather, and himself the fourth.’[226] The servile class
consisted of two kinds. First, those of native race termed _Taeog_ or
_Villanus_, and the _Caeth_ or prædial serf. The former class was
analogous to the _Daer Ceile_ or bond tenants, and the latter to the
_Sencleithe_ of the Irish.

Besides the occupiers of the soil, who were native members of the tribe,
there was a class of foreign settlers analogous to the _Fuidhir_ of the
Irish, who were termed _Alltudion_ or strangers, and were settled on the
waste lands.

The land which formed originally the common property of the tribe now
appears as consisting of the _Tir Gwelyawg_ or inheritance land, similar
to the Irish _Orba_. Part was held in demesne and cultivated by the
_Alltudion_ or stranger villains, and the _Caethion_, or prædial serfs;
and part occupied by the _Taeog_, or native members of the tribe, who
had become his tenants. There was also the _Tir Bwrdd_ or mensal land,
and the _Tir Cylladus_ or geldable land, also termed _Tir Cyfrif_ or
register land, which was divided among the _Aillt_ or native members of
the tribe.[227] The mode in which the land was occupied will, however,
be better understood in connection with the system of land measurement
which appears in these laws.

It is thus given in the Laws of Gwynedd. The smallest denomination of
land was the _Erw_ or acre. It was a ridge of land. The measure was what
was termed the long yoke of sixteen feet, the breadth consisted of two
yokes, and the length was thirty times its breadth. It thus contained
3413 square yards, that is, somewhat less than three-fourths of an
imperial acre. The basis of this system is the number four. Four of
these _Erws_ formed a _Tyddyn_ or man’s house, that is, the homestead of
a single family, and four _Tyddyns_ made a _Randir_ or division of land.
Four _Randirs_ formed a _Gavael_, and four _Gavaels_ the _Tref_ or
townland. Four _Trefs_ made a _Maenawl_. Twelve _Maenawls_ and two
_Trefs_ formed a _Cymwd_, and two _Cymwds_ a _Cantrev_, so called
because it thus contained one hundred _Trefs_. The _Cymwd_, however,
appears to be the true unit in this system, for we are told that the two
_Trefs_ which it contained, besides the twelve _Maenawls_, were for the
use of the _Brenin_ or king. One was his _Maertrev_ land, and the other
for his waste and summer pasture. There were thus, we are told, four
legal _Erws_ of tillage in every _Tyddyn_; sixteen in every _Randir_;
sixty-four in every _Gavael_; two hundred and fifty-six in the _Tref_;
one thousand and twenty-four in every _Maenawl_; twelve thousand two
hundred and eighty-eight in the twelve _Maenawls_. In the two _Trefs_
which pertain to the court are to be five hundred and twelve _Erws_; the
whole of that, when summed up, is twelve thousand and eight hundred
_Erws_ in the _Cymwd_,[228] or about 9600 imperial acres.

The _Tref_ thus, in the main, corresponds to the _Ballyboe_ or
ploughgate of the Irish system, and the fifty _Trefs_ of the _Cymwd_
were thus distributed among the people. Sixteen _Trefs_ formed the _Tir
Cyfrif_ or register land, occupied by the _Bonedic_ or free members of
the tribe. Eight _Trefs_, or two _Maenawls_, were assigned to the
_Cynghellawr_ and the _Maer_ who represented the king in the Cymwd, and
divided the register land among the people. Twenty-four _Trefs_, or six
_Maenawls_, were the _Tir Gwelyawg_ or inheritance land, possessed by
the free _Uchelwyr_; and the two _Trefs_ which remained over were the
king’s _Tir Bwrdd_ or mensal land. Under the _Uchelwyr_ there was a
similar distribution of land, and it is obvious that what was originally
the common land of the tribe, had now come to be viewed as the property
of the king; and the _Bonedic_, or original free occupiers of the land,
now appear as the king’s _Aillts_. Though, like the Irish _Ceile_, they
came to occupy a dependent position in relation to the superior, their
original mode of occupation of the soil remained unchanged, and the
_Maer_ and _Cynghellawr_ are directed to share this land equally between
all in the _Tref_ or township, and on that account it is called _Tir
Cyfrif_ or register land. On the other hand, the sons succeeded equally
to the _Tir Gwelyawg_ or inheritance land, and if they failed, it went
to their first and second cousins, after whom there was no further
division, a succession very similar to the Irish Gavelcine.

This system of land-measures was not, however, uniform, for we are told
that Bleddyn, a prince of Gwynedd and Powis, altered the size of the
_Tyddyn_ or smallest holding from four _Erws_ to twelve _Erws_ when held
by an _Uchelwr_, eight _Erws_ when held by an _Aillt_, and four when
held by a _Godaeog_ or superior _Taeog_,[229] and in the Laws of Dyved
we find a still greater variety. In these laws the _Tref_ or township in
the free manors is to consist of four _Randirs_, instead of sixteen as
in the Laws of Gwynedd, and the Randir is to contain three hundred and
twelve _Erws_, ‘so that the owner may have in the three hundred _Erws_
arable pasture and fuel wood and space for buildings on the twelve
_Erws_.’ The _Erw_, however, is smaller than that in the Laws of
Gwynedd, for while it is of the same breadth, viz., the long yoke of
sixteen feet, it is only sixteen times as long in place of thirty.
Again, in place of the _Maenawl_ containing a uniform quantity of four
_Trefs_, the lowland _Maenawl_, where the land is more fertile, is to
consist of seven _Trefs_, and the upland _Maenawl_ thirteen.[230] The
land-measures as given in the Code of Gwent are very similar, but with
some variations. There is the same direction that there are to be four
_Randirs_ in the _Tref_ and three hundred and twelve _Erws_ in the
_Randir_, but the _Erw_ contains eighteen rods of eighteen feet in place
of sixteen yokes in the length, and there are to be thirteen _Trefs_ in
every _Maenawl_, except those of the _Taeog Trefs_, which contain only
seven. Of the four _Randirs_ in the free _Tref_ three are for occupancy
and the fourth pasturage for the three; but in the _Taeog Tref_ there
are only three _Randirs_, the third being pasturage for the other
two.[231]

The original rights of the free members of the tribe, on which their
possession of the register land is based, are thus defined in the Triads
of the Social State:—‘There are three original rights of every native
Welshman (_Cymro Cynwhynawl_),—first, the possession, without
restriction, of five _Erws_ of land; second, a right of determining the
constitutional law of the country under protection and in right of the
_Pencenedl_; and third, a right to the freedom of the country in
general, that is to say, that he be free to go whither he will without
loss of privilege or verdict, unless when in actual service of the
country, or of a court of law.’[232]

The burdens upon the land and its possessors were as follows:—The
sixteen _Trefs_ in the _Cymwd_ possessed by the _Aillt_ paid a rent in
kind, termed _Dawnbwyd_, which was similar to the _Biatad_ or food-rent
of the Irish system, and were subject to the _Cylch_ and _Dovraith_ of
the superior, or refection and quartering, equivalent to the _Conmedha_
or _Coigny_ of the Irish. From the _Trefs_ possessed by the _Uchelwyr_,
and the two manors belonging to the _Maer_ and _Cynghellawr_, the king
received a _Gwestva_ or food-rent, which corresponds to the _Bestighi_
or food-rent of the house paid by every rank in the Irish tribe to the
_Ri Tuath_; but in the Welsh system the payment in kind was, in part,
commuted for a money payment, and we find no trace of the subsidy or
gift of stock by the superior, in proportion to the return in the shape
of food-rent, which characterises the whole relations of the different
grades in the Irish tribe to each other.[233]

Besides these regular burdens, there were two that may be termed casual.
These were the _Ebidiw_ or relief, payable to the superior by the heir
of a defunct vassal; and secondly, the _Amobr_, _Gobr Merch_, or maiden
fee, that is, a fee paid to the superior by the person subject to that
payment on the marriage of a daughter. By the Welsh laws the _Amobyrs_
of the daughters are said to be of equal amount with the _Ebidiws_ of
their fathers, and there were three _Ebidiws_—an _Ebidiw_ of a pound, an
_Ebidiw_ of six score pence, and an _Ebidiw_ of three score pence. The
first was paid by the principal officers of the palace—by the
_Pencenedl_ and by the officers of the country, the _Maer_ and the
_Cynghellawr_. The second by the superior officers, the _Uchelwr_ or
_Breyr_, and the _Gwahalaeth_ or son of a lord; and the third by the
king’s _Taeog_, an _Arddelwman_ and an _Alltud_ whom the king has
enfranchised.[234]

[Sidenote: Fines for Slaughter.]

Another important feature of the Irish tribe system is exactly reflected
in the Welsh laws. The compensation for every injury, from the slaughter
of a member of the tribe to the smallest loss, was by fines based upon a
value or price put upon each person according to his position as regards
rank and wealth. The fines are the _Galanas_ for slaughter, equivalent
to the _Eric_ of the Irish; the _Saraad_, or fine for any personal
injury or insult, which seems to be the _Smacht_ of the Irish; the
_Dirwy_ and _Camlwrw_, equivalent to the _Dire_ fines of the Irish. The
_Gwerth_ or price of the different ranks, equivalent to the Irish Honor
price, and which regulated the _Galanas_, was as follows:—That of a king
is defined in the Laws of Gwynedd as three times his _Saraad_. The
_Gwerth_ or value and _Galanas_ of a _Pencenedl_ is to be paid by thrice
nine kine and thrice nine score kine, and his _Saraad_ is thrice nine
kine and thrice nine score of silver. The _Gwerth_ or price and the
_Galanas_ of an _Uchelwr_ was six score and six kine, and his _Saraad_
six kine and six score of silver. That of a native _Bonedic_, or free
member of a tribe, was three score and three kine, and his _Saraad_ was
three kine and three score of silver. That of a king’s _Alltudd_, or
foreign settler, was the same. The _Gwerth_ of the _Alltudd_ of an
_Uchelwr_, as well as his _Saraad_, was one half that of the king’s
_Alltudd_. The _Gwerth_ of a _Caeth_ or bondman, if of the island, was
one pound; if from beyond sea, one pound and six score pence, and his
_Saraad_ was twelve pence. The third of every _Galanas_ belongs to the
king, ‘for to him pertains the enforcing of it when the _Cenedl_ may be
unable to enforce it.’ The _Dirwy_ was twelve kine or three pounds; and
the _Camlwrw_, or fine for wrong, three kine or nine score pence.

[Sidenote: The sept in Wales.]

So far the resemblance between the Irish and the Welsh tribe seems
sufficiently marked, and we can also trace in the Welsh Laws the
existence of the sept, though it does not come so prominently forward as
in the Irish Laws. The _Uchelwr_ or territorial lord, from which class
alone the _Pencenedl_ was elected, had under him a class of native
_Cymri_ who had become his _Aillt_ or tenants, and had likewise settled
upon his land, the _Alltudion_ or stranger tenants, both bond and free,
and his prædial serfs or _Caethim_. These formed his _Teulu_ or sept,
which was sufficiently numerous to turn out a military force of one
hundred and twenty fighting men;[235] and we find, though to a more
limited extent, the same system by which the nearer relations of the
chief formed an artificial group, which inherited his lands and were
responsible for the crimes of its members. The law of succession in the
_Tir Gwelyawg_ or inheritance land was this—‘Three times shall the same
patrimony be shared between three grades of a kindred. First, between
brothers; the second time between cousins; the third time between second
cousins; after that there is no propriate share of land;’[236] and in
the Commentaries this is illustrated by the following figure,

                          Great Grandfather
    +——————————————-|——————————————+
    |                             |                            |
 Brother                    Grandfather                     Brother
    |       +——————————-+—————————-+        |
    |       |                     |                   |        |
 Cousin  Brother               Father               Brother  Cousin
    |       |      +———————+—————-+       |        |
    |       |      |              |           |       |        |
 Second  Cousin  Brother         Son       Brother  Cousin   Second
 Cousin     |      |              |           |       |      Cousin
         Second  Cousin        Grandson     Cousin  Second
         Cousin    |              |           |     Cousin
                 Second     Great Grandson  Second
                 Cousin                     Cousin

which shows the similarity of the system with the Irish. The commentator
adds, ‘The above figure guides a person to understand the arrangement
and connection existing between him and his ancestors and his
co-inheritors and his children. For the ancestors of a person are his
father, his grandfather, and his great-grandfather; the co-inheritors
are brothers and cousins and second cousins; the heirs of a person are
those who proceed from his body, as a son, and a grandson and a
great-grandson; and if a person be skilful in the use of the figure
described above, when a person descended from any one of the three kins
of the body of the original stock shall die without heir of his body, he
will know who is to obtain the land of such a one according to law. For
unto the third degree there is to be an appropriate sharing of land in
the court of a _Cymwd_ or _Cantrey_.’[237]

These three _kins_ of the Welsh Laws evidently represent the first two
_Finés_ of the Irish Laws, viz., the _Geilfiné_ and _Deirbhfiné_, but
the Welsh Law proceeds no further with the distribution than the first
nine persons of the Irish group of seventeen. The same group was liable
under the Welsh Laws for the crimes of its members, and the fines
incurred by them, but the nine degrees are differently stated, in a
manner which appears to extend it as far as the Irish system. We find in
the Laws that ‘whoever shall confess _Galanas_, he and his kindred shall
pay the whole of the _Saraad_ and _Galanas_ of the person killed;’ and
then the kindred is thus defined: ‘Thus the grades of kindred are
denominated which are to pay _Galanas_, or to receive payment. The first
grade of the nine is the father and mother of the murderer or of the
murdered. The second is a grandfather. The third is a great-grandfather.
The fourth is brothers and sisters. The fifth is a cousin. The sixth is
a second cousin. The seventh is a third cousin. The eighth is a relation
in the fourth remove. The ninth is a relation in the fifth remove. The
collateral relations in these grades are the nephews and uncles of the
murderer or of the murdered. A nephew is a son of a brother or sister or
of a cousin or of a second cousin, male or female. An uncle is a brother
of a father or mother, or of a grandfather or grandmother, or of a
great-grandfather or great-grandmother. This is the amount of the share
of each of these; whoever may be nearer by one degree to the murderer,
or to the murdered, than another, is to pay or to receive twice as much
as the other; and so in respect to all the grades and their collateral
members.’[238]

The head of the sept was termed the _Penteulu_, but we have little
information as to his relation towards the king or the _Pencenedl_,
except that it was from the class of _Uchelwyr_ that these were elected,
and thus, as in the Irish system, they too had each their _Teulu_ or
sept.

[Sidenote: Fosterage in Wales.]

There is but one allusion in the Welsh Laws to the system of fosterage,
but it is sufficient to show that this custom also prevailed among the
Welsh tribes. We find in the code of Gwynedd that ‘if an _Uchelwr_ place
his son to be reared with the _Aillt_ of a lord, by the permission or by
the sufferance of the lord, for a year and a day, that son is to have a
son’s share of the _Aillt’s_ land, and ultimately of his property.’[239]
The age of the boy, however, is distinguished into only two periods.
First, from his baptism till he is seven years of age, during which time
his father is to swear and pay for him, except the payment of _Dirwy_ or
_Camlwrw_ for him to the king; because the king is not to have any
_Dirwy_ or _Camlwrw_ for an error nor for the act of an idiot, and he is
not endowed with reason; he must, however, indemnify the sufferer for
his property. At the end of seven years he himself is to swear for his
acts, and his father is to pay. From the time when a boy is born till he
shall be fourteen years of age, he is to be at his father’s platter, and
his father lord over him; and he is to receive no punishment but that of
his father, and he is not to receive one penny of his property during
that time, only in common with his father. At the end of fourteen years
the father is to bring his son to the lord and commend him to his
charge; and then the youth is to become his man, and to be on the
privilege of his lord; and he is himself to answer every claim that may
be made on him; and is to possess his own property; thenceforward his
father is not to correct him, more than a stranger; and if he should
correct him, upon complaint made by the son against him he is subject to
_Dirwy_, and is to do him right for the _Saraad_. ‘From that age onward
he is of the same privilege with an innate _Boneddig_.’[240]

The preceding short analysis of the tribal organisation in its leading
features, as presented to us in the ancient Irish and Welsh laws, is an
indispensable preliminary to any inquiry into the ancient land tenure of
the people of Scotland in Celtic times. Without it we should have been
at a loss to discover the source and origin of many of the peculiar
features it presents in later times.




                              CHAPTER VI.

                         THE TRIBE IN SCOTLAND.


[Sidenote: Early notices of tribal organisation.]

In investigating the early social state of the Celtic inhabitants of
Great Britain, we possess an advantage which does not attach to that of
Ireland. For the Pagan period in the latter country we have no
information except what is derived from native tradition; but in Britain
we possess in addition a few incidental notices by contemporary writers
of other countries, both as regards the native population of the Roman
province and the Barbarian nations beyond its limits. These notices, few
and general as they are, yet indicate the presence of a social
organisation very similar to that of Ireland.

When we are told by one Greek writer ‘that its aboriginal tribes inhabit
Britain, in their usages still preserving the primitive modes of life,
and that they have many kings and princes;’[241] by another, ‘that there
are several states amongst them. Forests are their cities; for having
enclosed an ample space with felled trees, here they make themselves
huts and lodge their cattle;’[242] when Cæsar tells us of the
inhabitants of the interior, whom he calls indigenous, that ‘they did
not resort to the cultivation of the soil for food, but were dependent
upon their cattle and the flesh of animals slain in hunting for their
food;’[243] when Solinus reports of the inhabitants of the five Western
Isles forming the southern group, that ‘they knew nothing of the
cultivation of the ground, but lived upon fish and milk,’ which latter
implies the possession of herds of cattle, ‘and that they had one king,
who was not allowed to possess property;’[244] when Tacitus speaks ‘of
the numerous states beyond the Firth of Forth,’ and describes the great
Caledonian army which Agricola encountered at the Mons Granpius as a
federation of all the states of the northern population; and when we are
told of the two great divisions of them in the third century—the
Caledonians and the Mæatæ—‘that they inhabit mountains wild and
waterless, and plains desert and marshy; that they live by pasturage and
the chase, and that their state is chiefly democratical;’[245]—we can
see that they consisted of an aggregation of tribes occupying the land
in common, and whose chief possessions consisted of cattle. When these
writers add that they had their wives in common, they indicate at least
that looser relation between the sexes which usually prevailed before
the introduction of Christianity had invested a stricter rule of
marriage with its sanction, and which led to a connection through
females as being regarded with more favour than that through males.

[Sidenote: The tribe among the Picts.]

When we come down, however, to Christian times, we find the existence of
the _Tuath_ both as the tribe and as the tribe territory fully
recognised as characterising the social organisation of the population
of Gaelic race. The ancient tract, termed the _Amra Choluim Chilli_, of
Dallan Forgaill, preserved in the _Liabhar na h-Uidre_, contains
repeated references to the _Tuaths_ both in the sense of tribes and of
their territories, and as regards the Pictish nation as well as the
Dalriadic colony. Thus we are told that Saint Columba ‘illuminated
countries and territories’ (_Tir agus Tuatha_), and that from him ‘the
_Tuaths_ used to be disciplined.’ Again, when it is said, ‘Through an
idolatrous _Tuath_ he meditated criminality,’ which is explained to
mean, ‘when going through the _Tuath_ or territories of the idols he
would know their criminality towards God,’ it can only refer to the
pagan nation of the Picts; and when we are told that ‘he sought seven
_Tuaths_, viz., the five _Tuaths_ of Erin, and two _Tuaths_ in Alban,’
the latter must be identified with the territory given him by the Picts,
who, according to Bede, inhabited the districts adjacent to Iona. In
another passage, when St. Columba is referred to as ‘the son of
Fedelimid for whom used to fight or whom used to serve the twenty
_Tuaths_,’ the word is probably used in the sense of tribes, and it is
still more plainly used in this sense, as existing among the southern
Picts, when he is described as ‘the teacher who used to teach the tribes
who were around Tai, that is, the name of a river in Alban,’ which can
obviously be identified with the river Tay. In another passage they are
referred to as the people of the Tay (_Lucht Toi_); and the _Tuaths_ or
tribes are indicated as existing both among the Dalriads and the Picts,
when he is called ‘the champion who bound new things for the alliance of
Conall, that is, the champion of the new things is not here for
alliance, that is, for confirming the alliance of Conall, that is,
between the _Tuaths_ of Conall within, or at making their alliance with
other _Tuaths_ externally.’[246] Conall was the king of Dalriada at the
time when St. Columba came over from Ireland to Scotland, and the other
_Tuaths_ or tribes which were external to his kingdom can only refer to
the neighbouring tribes of the Picts. The undoubted antiquity of this
tract gives great value to these incidental references to the existence
of the _Tuath_ or tribe, not only among the Scots of Dalriada, where we
might expect to meet them, but also among the two great races of the
northern and southern Picts, and this is confirmed by other authorities
of a later date. Thus, in the tract called ‘The Genealogy of Corca
Laidhe,’ referred to in a previous chapter, we read that ‘Irial Glumnar,
son of Conall Cearnach, had two sons, viz., Forc and Iboth. Rechtgidh
Righdearg led them into Alban. They gained great battles, so that great
districts were laid waste in Alban, until the men of Alban submitted to
Rechtgidh Righdearg, so that he was king of Erin and Alban; and it was
from them sprang the two _Tuaths_ or tribes, _Tuath Forc_ and _Tuath
Iboth_ in Alban.’[247] Rechtgidh Righdearg was one of the mythic pagan
kings of Ireland, and Irial Glumnar a traditionary hero of the
_Cruithnigh_, or Picts of Ulster; but it is a fair inference from it
that two _Tuaths_ or tribes bearing the names of Forc and Iboth were
known in Scotland, and the name Forc, which is the old form of that of
the river Forth, indicates their situation on the northern shore of that
river or estuary, that is, among the southern Picts. That a social
organisation similar to the Irish tribal system prevailed among the
southern Picts, to whom St. Columba’s mission was mainly directed, is
confirmed by the Gaelic entries in the Book of Deer, which open with the
statement that ‘Columba and Drostan, son of Cosgrach, his pupil, came
from Hi, as God had shown them, unto _Abbordoboir_ or Aberdour, and Bede
the _Cruthnech_ or Pict, who was _Mormaer_ of Buchan, gave them that
town in freedom for ever from _Mormaer_ and _Toisech_;’ thus exactly
corresponding to the grant of land to the church of Kells, quoted in a
former chapter as free from rent, tribute, hosting, coigny, or any other
claim of king or _Toisech_. Where there are _Toisechs_ there are
_Tuaths_, and the district of Buchan probably formed a _Mortuath_ like
the other districts ruled over by a _Mormaer_, the equivalent in
Scotland of the _Ri Mortuath_ of the Irish system.

[Sidenote: The tribe in Dalriada.]

The Scottish kingdom of Dalriada was at this time confined within very
narrow limits, and could hardly claim a higher position than that of a
_Mortuath_, as we find that it consisted of three tribes, termed, in the
tract ‘Of the History of the Men of Alban,’ the three powerfuls in
Dalriada. These were the _Cinel Gabran_, the _Cinel Angus_, and the
_Cinel Loarn_, who traced their descent from the three sons of
Eochaidh—Fergus, Angus, and Loarn—who led the colony from Irish
Dalriada. We obtain from this tract some valuable information as to the
constitution of these tribes. The _Cinel Gabran_ occupied Kintyre in its
old extent, including Knapdale, the district of Cowall, and the islands,
that is, of Arran and Bute, and consisted of five hundred and sixty
houses. The _Cinel Angusa_ possessed Isla and Jura, and consisted of
four hundred and thirty houses. The _Cinel Loarn_ possessed the
extensive district of Lorn, extending from Lochleven to the Point of
Ashnish, and part of the opposite coast of Morvern, and consisted of
four hundred and twenty houses. The districts thus occupied by these
tribes surrounded an inner region, extending from the range of mountains
called Drumalban to the arms of the sea termed Lochs Craignish and
Crinan, consisting of the two districts of Lochaw and Ardskeodnish. This
inner region seems to have been left to the older inhabitants of the
country, and to have borne the name of _Airgialla_, possibly for the
same reason that that name was applied to the extensive region in the
heart of Ulster, wrested by the Scots under the three Collas from the
Irish Picts.[248] The houses of which these three tribes consisted
seemed to have formed groups of twenty houses each, as we are told that
their sea muster assigned twice seven benches or seats for rowers to
each twenty houses, but the armed muster for the _Sluaged_ or hosting
was, for the _Cinel Gabran_ three hundred men, for the _Cinel Angusa_
five hundred men, and for the _Cinel Loarn_ seven hundred men, but one
hundred of these were furnished by the people of _Airgialla_.[249]

[Sidenote: The tribe in Galloway.]

The only other districts of modern Scotland in which a Gaelic population
remained are those of the Lennox and of Galloway, and in the latter we
can trace the remains of the same tribal system. Thus in the year 1276
we find King Alexander the Third confirming a charter by which Neil,
Earl of Carrick, granted and confirmed to Roland of Carrick and his
heirs the right of being head of their kin in all pleas relating to
_kenkenoll_ and the office of bailie, and the leadership of the men of
the country under the earl. This shows that the _Cinel_ or tribe, with
its head or _Ceannchinel_, had formerly existed among the Gaelic
population of Galloway; and the same thing is indicated by some notices
of lost charters preserved in the ancient Index published in 1798. Thus
there is a charter by David II. to Donald Edzear of the captainship of
_Clanmacgowin_, and a charter ‘anent the Clan of _Muintircasduff_,[250]
John M‘Kennedy captain thereof;’ this term of Captain being the
equivalent of the _Toisech_ of the Irish and Scottish Gael,[251] and the
word _Muintir_, or people, being one of the appellations of a tribe.

[Sidenote: Modification of original tribes under foreign influences.]

These indications of the existence of a tribal organisation analogous to
that in Ireland among the Celtic population during the period when, with
the exception of Saxon Lothian, both king and people were Celtic,
comprise in the main the information we are able to gain from the most
trustworthy sources available to us; but after the purely Celtic dynasty
of kings of Scottish race came to an end in the eleventh century in the
person of Malcolm the Second, this tribal system became exposed to
powerful external influences, which greatly modified its character, and
finally resulted in its disappearance in the eastern districts under
feudal forms, and its passing over in the mountainous regions of the
north and west into the clanship which was afterwards found there.

[Sidenote: Passing of the Mortuath into the Earldom, and the Tribe into
           the Thanage.]

Soon after the death of Malcolm the Second the northern districts of
Scotland fell under the dominion of the Norwegian Earl of Orkney, while
the Celtic _Mormaer_ of Moray reigned in a kingdom the centre of which
was at Scone; but when the usurper was expelled by the heir through a
female of the ancient line, and Malcolm Ceannmor was established on the
throne by the powerful aid of the Angles of Northumberland under their
Earl Siward, and the northern districts reverted to his sway on the
death of the Norwegian Earl, Saxon influences became predominant; and
the new dynasty, still more closely connected with the Saxons through
the marriage of its founder with the Saxon Princess Margaret, found its
support mainly in the Anglic population of Lothian, which now became the
most important province of the extended monarchy. His son Eadgar reigned
in reality as a Saxon monarch, and when on his death the kingdom was
divided between his brothers Alexander and David, the former
consolidated his kingdom north of the Firths of Forth and Clyde upon the
basis of Saxon institutions, while the latter ruled over the districts
of British Strathclyde and Anglic Lothian as a feudal lord, with Norman
sympathies and supported by a powerful following of Norman nobles.
During the reigns of Eadgar and Alexander there was a silent advance of
Saxon colonisation, and a progressive assimilation of the people to
Saxon customs, which led to a Saxon nomenclature being imposed upon
their Celtic institutions which found analogous forms in the Saxon laws;
and thus in the kingdom of Alexander the First we find the Celtic
_Mormaer_ appearing as _Comes_ or Earl, while the name of _Thanus_ or
thane was applied to the _Toisech_,[252] and the tribe territory is now
termed _Thanagium_ or Thanage. In the British district of Strathclyde
the Celtic forms disappeared before the advancing feudalism of David;
and when upon the death of his brother he became the first feudal king
of all Scotland and its first lawgiver, the constitution of his kingdom
was based upon the feudal system; and as its leading principle was that
the king was feudal superior of all the territory, and all rights to
land emanated from him, all land not given out as feudal holdings was
held to be Crown land, and the tribe territories not placed under feudal
lords, and now termed Thanages, were regarded as royal demesnes.[253]

When Fordun, therefore, in the forty-third chapter of his fourth book,
tells us that ‘of old almost the whole kingdom was divided into
Thanages,’ he was not referring to that fabulous state of matters
described in a previous chapter, when _Thanes_ were supposed to be
governors of provinces, with an _Abthane_ over them as high steward—a
state of matters which never existed in Scotland; but, as is evident
from the context, to those smaller territories termed _Thanages_ in his
own day, and, viewing these _Thanages_ as representing the more ancient
_Tuaths_ or tribe territories, he is reporting a genuine tradition of
the tribal organisation which preceded the Saxon and feudal forms.

[Sidenote: Distinction of people into free and servile classes.]

The principal fragments of the ancient tribal law which we find still
preserved in the subsequent legislation were those relating to the fines
paid in compensation for different offences, analogous to those
contained in the Irish and Welsh Laws; and these afford us the best
indications of the different ranks or grades of society in the old
tribal system. We find in Scotland, as in Ireland and Wales, the broad
distinction between the free and servile classes. Thus in the laws of
King William the Lion there is preserved this fragment of the older
system ‘of the law that is callyt weregylt. Of euery thief through all
Scotland the weregehede is xxxiiii. ky and one half, whether he be a
freeman or a serf (_liber sive servus_).’[254]

[Sidenote: Classes of freemen.]

Of the classes of freemen these laws regarding fines afford us complete
information. Among the laws attributed to King David I. is a fragmentary
code termed ‘Leges inter Brettos et Scottos.’ It is preserved in Latin,
in Norman French, and in the vernacular Scotch. By the Bretti are meant
the Britons of Strathclyde, and the term Scotti now comprehended the
whole inhabitants of the country north of the Firths of Forth and Clyde.
David had ruled over the former as earl during the reign of Alexander
the First, and on his accession to the throne seems in this short code
to have recognised as law the system of fines which existed among his
Celtic subjects both of Gaelic and of British race, and to have included
them in a short code applicable to both. It contains the fines paid in
compensation for slaughter, termed here _Cro_, a word signifying death;
but it is said to be equivalent to the _Galnes_ or _Galanas_ of the
Welsh laws, and also to the _Enauch_ or Honor price of the Irish.
Another fine for slaughter is called _Kelchyn_, and the fines for ‘Blude
drawn’ seem to be the _Saraad_ of the Welsh. They were termed _Bludwyts_
in Saxon and _Fuilrath_ in Gaelic.[255]

The _Cro_ of the King of Scotland is said to be one thousand ‘ky’ or
three thousand ‘ore’ or ounces of gold, three ounces being the value of
a cow, and his _Kelchyn_ is one hundred ‘ky.’

The _Cro_ of the king’s son,—that is, the Tanist of the Irish Laws, or
of an Earl of Scotland, who is thus placed in the same rank,—is seven
score ‘ky’ and ten ‘ky.’ His _Kelchyn_ is three score ky and six ky and
two parts of a cow; and for Blude drawn, nine ky.

The _Cro_ of the son of an Earl, or of a Thane, who is placed in the
same rank, is one hundred ky. His _Kelchyn_, forty-four ky and
twenty-one pence and two-thirds of a penny; and for Blude drawn, six ky.

The _Cro_ of the son of a Thane is three score ky and six ky and two
parts of a cow. His _Kelchyn_ is less by a third than his father’s, and
is twenty-nine ky and elevenpence and the third part of a halfpenny; and
for Blude drawn, three ky.

The _Cro_ of the nevow or grandson of a Thane, or of ane _Ogethearn_, is
forty-four ky and twenty-one pence and two parts of a penny. His
_Kelchyn_ is not given, but for Blude drawn it is two ky and two parts
of a cow.

We are then told that all these who are lower in the _kyn_ (parentela)
are callit _Carlis_ (_rustici_, vilayn), and that the _Cro_ of a _Carl_
is sixteen ky, that he has no _Kelchyn_, and that the ‘Blud’ of a _Carl_
is one cow.

We have also in this code a section ‘Of thaim that are slayn in the
peace of the King and other lordis.’

‘Giff ony man be slayn in the peis of our lord the Kyng, til him
perteins nine score ky.’

If in the peace of the sone of the King or of an Earl, four score and
ten ky.

If in the peace of the son of an Earl or of a Thayn, three score ky.

If in the peace of the son of a Thane, forty ky; and if in the peace of
a nevo or grandson of a Thane, twenty ky and two parts of a cow.’[256]

The names of the different ranks here are analogous to the Irish system,
where the son of each grade occupied the rank of the next inferior
grade.[257] The Earl was the Scottish _Mormaer_, the _Ri Mortuath_ of
the Irish. The Thanus or thane was the _Toisech_. The _Ogethearn_ is the
Irish word _Ogthighearna_, one of the names applied to the second class
of the _Gradflatha_,[258] or those _Aires_ who received stock from a
superior _Aire_. They were also called _Oglaochs_. The fines occupy an
intermediate place between those of the Irish and of the Welsh Laws, but
most resemble the latter; and the distinction between the free and bond
classes and the rights of the _kyn_ are clearly indicated from the
following addition it made to the account of the _Kelchyn_ fine:—‘If the
wife of a freeman (liberi hominis) be slain, her husband shall have the
_Kelchyn_, and her kyn shall have the _Cro_ and the _Galnes_. If the
wife of a _Carl_ (_rustici_, vileyn) be slain, the lord in whose lands
he dwells shall have the _Kelchyn_, and her _kyn_ shall have the _Cro_
and the _Galnes_.’

A fragment has also been preserved giving the _merchet_ or maiden-fee
paid to the superior on the marriage of the daughter of a dependant. It
is the _Amobr_ or _Gobr merch_ of the Welsh Laws:—‘According to the
assize of the land of Scotland, the _merchet_ of every woman, whether
she be a serf or mercantile, was one calf or three shillings. If she was
the daughter of a freeman who was not lord of a township, her _merchet_
was one cow or six shillings. If the daughter of the son of a thane or
of a _ochethiern_, two cows or twelve shillings. If the daughter of an
earl, twelve cows.’[259]

The fines which were paid for abstaining from attending the king’s
hosting are preserved in the Statutes of Alexander the Second, where the
following ‘record was made at St. Johnstoun or Perth before the king be
all the “dempsteris” (judices) of Scotland in the seventh year of the
king’s reign, or A.D. 1221,‘ after the king had been in hosting at
Inverness against Donald Neilson.’ They thus declare that ‘of those that
remained away from the host, the king shall have the forfeiture of the
erlis if their thanes’ (that is, the earls’ thanes) ‘remained from the
host; but how much that forfalture should be was not determined. Of all
others which remained at home—that is to say, of the lands of bischopis,
abbotis, baronis, knychtis, and thaynis which hold of the king, the king
alone ought to have the forfalture; that is to say, of a thane, vi cows
and a calf; of an _ochtyern_, xv sheep or vi shillings; but the king
tharof shall have but the one half, and the thane or the knycht the
other half. Of a _Carl_, a cow and a sheep; and they also are to be
divided between the king and the thane or the knycht.’ ‘But when by the
leave of the thane or the knicht they remained behind the king, he shall
have all the forfalt. For no earl nor sergand of the erlis in the land
of any man holding of the king ought to come to raise that default but
the Erl of Fyffe, and he shall not come as earl but as the _Mair_ of the
king of his rights to be raised within the earldom of Fyffe. Of the
_Cairlis_, however, where the king and the earl divide betwixt them, the
king and the earl shall have the one half and the thane the other half;
but where the thane falls in forfalt it shall be divided between the
king and the earl, as in the laws of King William is declared.’[260]

The analogy between this arrangement and the system of fines for
withdrawing from hosting contained in the Irish Laws will be apparent at
once, and the different grades here given are the same as those in the
code of David I., though adapted to a period when the thane appears as
the vassal of the king or of the earl, and the _ochtyern_ as the vassal
of the thane.

[Sidenote: Ranks of bondmen.]

The different ranks of the bondmen or unfree class have also been
preserved in the code of laws termed _Quoniam attachiamenta_. They are
there termed native-men (_nativi_), and we are told that there are
several kinds of nativity or Bondage (_nativitatis sive bondagii_). For
some are native-men of their grandfather and great-grandfather, which is
commonly called _de evo et trevo_, whom their lord may claim to be
naturally his native-men by narrating their progenitors, if their names
are known, as his great-grandfather, his grandfather, and his father,
who are challenged, declaring them to have been his native-men in such a
township and in such a spot in that township, and to have made and
rendered to him and his predecessors servile service in a servile land
for many years; and this nativity or bondage may be proved by the kin of
him who is challenged or by a good assize.

Another kind of bondage is similar to this, when any stranger receives
servile land from any lord doing servile service for that land; and if
he dies in that land and his son likewise dies in that land, and
afterwards his son lives in the same land and dies there, then his whole
posterity to the fourth degree shall be of servile condition to his
lord, and his whole posterity may be proved in a similar manner.

The third kind of _nativity_ or bondage is when a freeman, in order to
have a lord or the maintenance (_manutenencia_) of any great man, gives
himself up to that lord to be his native or bondman (_nativum seu
bondum_) in his court by the hair of his forehead; and if he thereafter
withdraws himself from his lord, or denies his _nativitie_ to him, his
lord may prove him to be his native-man before the justiciary by an
assize, challenging him that he in such a day in such a year came to him
in his court and gave himself up to be his man; and if any one is
adjudged to be the native or bondman to any lord, that lord can seize
him by the nose and reduce him to his former servitude, taking from him
all his goods to the value of four pence.[261]

These definitions of the different kinds of _nativi_ or bondmen may no
doubt apply to a later period than we are now referring to, and be more
or less connected with feudal forms, but we may, notwithstanding, infer
that they preserve the characteristics of the servile class in Celtic
times; for, although the upper classes may in the Lowland districts have
been superseded by Saxon or Norman proprietors holding their lands in
feudal tenure, the servile occupiers of the soil of Celtic race who were
attached to the land would remain and become the villains of the feudal
lord; and so we find that wherever they appear in the Chartularies they
possess Celtic names.

We see from the above description that their connection with their lord
was of two kinds—first, by occupying under him servile land; and second,
by placing themselves under him as personal bondmen; and of the former
class, they were either natives by descent or strangers who had taken
land from him, and the latter became native serfs after four
generations. Here we recognise at once the _Sencleithe_ or old adherents
of the Irish law, and the _Bond Fuidhir_, who became _Sencleithe_ after
four generations. The latter class of personal serfs are the _Mogha_ of
the Irish and the _Caeth_ of the Welsh Laws. The Celtic names by which
these two classes were known in feudal times have also been preserved to
us. Thus, in the Chartulary of Scone, King William the Lion grants a
mandate directing that if the abbot of Scone or his sergands shall find
in the lands or in the power of others any of the _Cumlawes_ and
_Cumherbes_ pertaining to his lands, he may reclaim them;[262] and in
the Chartulary of Dunfermline, the foundation charter by King David the
First grants that all his serfs and all his _Cumerlache_ from the time
of King Edgar shall be restored to the Church wherever they may be
found, and the scribe interprets the word _Cumer lache_ by _fugitivi_ on
the margin; and in a mandate by the same king to the same effect the
title is ‘Of the _fugitivi_ which are called _Cumerlache_.’[263] In the
last syllable of the name _Cumherbes_ or _Cumarherbe_ we can recognise
the Irish word _Orba_, applied to that part of the tribe territory which
had become the private property of the chiefs; and this name was no
doubt applied to that class of serfs whose bondage was derived from
their possessing servile land. They were the _ascripti glebae_ of feudal
times. The term _Cumlawe_ or _Cumarlawe_ is simply a translation of the
Latin term _manutenencia_, which characterised the third kind of bondage
above described, and whose tie to their master being a personal one, led
to their frequently escaping from hard usage and being reclaimed as
fugitives.[264] Thus among the laws of King William the Lion we find one
declaring that any one who detains a native fugitive man (_nativi
fugitivi_) after he has been demanded by his true lord or his bailie,
shall restore the said native-man with all his chattels, and shall
render to his lord the double of the loss he has sustained.[265]

[Sidenote: Measures of land.]

As in Ireland and Wales, so also in Scotland, the ancient measures of
land were closely connected with the tribal system, but here too we find
them more greatly affected by external influences than in the two former
countries. When we examine the most ancient land-measures of that part
of Scotland lying north of the Firths of Forth and Clyde, we do not find
the same local varieties which can be traced in the different provinces
of Ireland and Wales, but instead, a great and leading difference
between those of the eastern and the western districts. In the eastern
districts there is a uniform system of land denominations consisting of
Davachs, Ploughgates, and Oxgangs, the davach consisting of four
ploughgates, and each ploughgate of eight oxgangs; but as soon as we
cross the great chain of mountains separating the eastern from the
western waters, we find a different system equally uniform. The
ploughgates and oxgangs disappear, and in their place we find davachs
and penny lands. The portion of land termed a _davach_ is here also
called a _Tirung_ or ounce land (_unciata terra_), and each davach or
_Tirung_ contains twenty penny lands.

The davach[266] being the only denomination common to both parts of the
country, we may infer that it belongs to the old Celtic system of
land-measures, and that the others are foreign importations. Now we find
in the ancient province of Lothian, which originally formed part of the
Anglic kingdom of Northumbria and possessed an Anglic population, the
land-measures consisted of Carucates or ploughgates, and Bovates or
oxgangs. The oxgang contained thirteen acres, two oxgangs made a
husband-land, and eight oxgangs a ploughgate, which thus consisted of
104 acres of arable land. On the other hand, in the islands of Orkney
and in the district of Caithness, which were formerly a Norwegian
earldom under the king of Norway, we find the land was valued according
to a standard of value derived from the weight of silver, the unit being
the ounce or _Eyrir_, eight ounces forming the _Mörk_ or pound, and
twenty pennings one ounce,[267] and thus the land-measures consisted of
_Oers_ or ounce lands, the ounce lands containing either eighteen or
twenty penny lands. They seem to have been so called, because under the
Norwegian rule each homestead paid one penny as _scat_.

It is therefore a fair inference that, with the Saxon colonisation, the
Saxon denominations superseded the older Celtic lesser denominations, as
forming the subdivisions of the Davach in the eastern districts, while
in the western seaboard and in the islands, which were for a time under
Norwegian rule, the Norwegian denominations replaced the Celtic, but in
both cases they were adapted to the existing divisions of land, which
could not be altered without interfering with the whole framework of
society. The Carucate or ploughgate was a term known to the Irish
system, and may likewise have existed in Scotland in Celtic times, as it
appears in Highland charters under the name of _Arachor_, the Gaelic
equivalent of the Latin _Aratrum_,[268] but seems sometimes to have
contained 160 acres in place of 104, and consisted of a definite measure
of arable land with common pasture;[269] and we find from a charter of a
Carucate or ploughgate of land on the Nith, that the common pasture
carried 24 cattle and 100 sheep,[270] and the minor terms can probably
still be traced in the topography of the districts. We have the words
_Ballin_, _Bal_, from _Baile_, a town, entering into many local names in
both parts of the country, as well as the word _Teaghlach_ or family,
corrupted into Tully and Tilly, as in Tullynessle, Tillymorgan, etc.
Then in the east there are the Pits, the old form of which, as appears
from the Book of Deer, was _Pette_ or _Pett_. It is there uniformly
connected with a personal name, as if it was applied to a single
homestead, as in _Pette mac Garnait_, _Pett mac Gobrig_, and _Pett
Malduib_, and the affix Pitt seems to have a similar meaning in the old
entry in the Chartulary of St. Andrews, where we read of the ‘villula’
or homestead, which is called Pitmokane.[271] In the western districts
we find the penny land also entering into the topography, in the form of
_Pen_ or Penny, in such names as Pennyghael, Pennycross, Penmollach,
while the halfpenny becomes _Leffen_, as in Leffenstrath; and if the
group of twenty houses, which we found characterising the early tribe
organisation in Dalriada, was the Davach, then we obtain the important
identification of these houses or homesteads with the later penny lands.
We find notices in the charters connected with this part of the country
of the _Shammark_, equal to two penny lands, of Cow lands, probably the
Irish _Ballyboe_, and of Horsegangs.[272] When these western districts
fell under the rule of the Scottish monarchs, the valuation of land
called the Old Extent seems to have been to some extent introduced. In
the eastern districts it corresponded so far with the land measures,
that the ploughgate was the same as the forty shilling or a three-merk
land;[273] but the merk land in the west appears to have had no uniform
relation to the penny land, though in Lochaber we find that five penny
lands were equal to a forty-shilling land, which seemed to indicate that
here also the ploughgate was the fourth part of a Davach, and consisted
of five homesteads; on the other hand, we are told that each township in
Isla consisted of two and a half merk lands.[274] The state of these
districts probably gave the Davachs and penny lands a fluctuating value,
which depended more upon the pasture and the stock it carried than on
the arable land. There is an old tradition that the Davach was land
capable of pasturing 320 cows, and that a merk land was as much land as
would graze twelve milch cows, ten yeld cows, including three-year-olds,
twelve two-year-olds, twelve year-olds, four horses, four fillies, mares
and followers, one hundred sheep, and eighty goats.[275] The two systems
of land measure appear to meet in Galloway, as in Carrick we find the
measure by Penny lands, which gradually become less frequent as we
advance eastward, where we encounter the extent by merks and pounds,
with an occasional appearance of a penny land, and of the Bovate or
oxgang in Church lands.

[Sidenote: Burdens on the land.]

The burdens upon the land held by the community in Scotland seem to have
been principally four. We find them still attaching to the Crown and the
Church lands during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and they are
analogous to those connected with the Irish tribe system. They were
_Cain_, _Conveth_, _Feacht_, and _Sluaged_. The two former were fixed
payments in kind. The two latter were services to which the possessor of
the land was subject. They are rendered in Latin by the words
_expeditio_ and _exercitus_. We find these burdens in both of the
leading divisions of the country north of the firths. Thus, by a deed
dated at Lismore in the year 1251, Sir Ewen, son of Duncan de Erregathil
(Argyll), granted to William, bishop of Argyll, fourteen penny lands in
Lismore, free of all secular exactions and dues—viz., _Cain_,
_Coneveth_, _Feacht_, _Sluaged_, and _Ich_—and of all secular
services;[276] and similarly Roger, bishop-elect of St. Andrews, granted
between 1188 and 1198, when he was consecrated, the lands of Duf Cuper
to the church and canons of St. Andrews, free of ‘_Can_ et _Cuneveth_ et
exercitu et auxilio et ab omni servicio et exactione seculari.’[277]

[Sidenote: The _Cain_ or _Can_.]

We find during this period that these dues and services were derived by
the king from the Crown lands, and by the superiors from lands not held
feudally. Thus King David grants to the monks of Dunfermline the tithe
of his whole _Can_ from Fif and Fothrif, likewise the tithe of his _Can_
of Clacmannan, and the half of his tithe of Ergaithel (Argyll) and
Kentir in that year, to wit, in which he receives _Can_ from it, and
these grants are repeated by his successor Malcolm IV.[278] King David
likewise grants to the church of Urchard (Urquhart) the tithe of the
_Can de Ergaithel de Muref_, that is, that part of the great province of
Ergadia or Ergaithel which belonged to Moray, extending from the Leven
to the border of North Argyll.[279] King William confirms to the bishop
of Moray the _Cana et Coneveta_ which his predecessors had received from
those who held land of the bishops during the time of King David and
King Malcolm;[280] and in an agreement in 1225 between the bishop and
Walter Cumyn of Badenoch, the bishop frees him from any claim he had for
the tithe of the _Can_ of his lord the king from the lands of
Badenoch.[281]

In Aberdeenshire we find the Earl of Mar granting to the bishop of St.
Andrews the tithe of the ‘redditus’ or _Can_ of his whole lands;[282]
and Thomas the Hostiary gives to the canons of Monimusk ten bolls of
meal and ten stones of cheese from his lands of Outherheicht, which is
afterwards called the _Can_ of Houctireycht.[283]

In Mearns or Kincardine Earl David of Huntingdon grants to the church
and canons of St. Andrews the whole _Kan_ and _Kuneveth_, which they
were due him, from the lands of Ecclesgirg, and the services which his
men of Eccleskirch were bound to render him.[284] Then in the beginning
of the thirteenth century the record of a dispute between the bishop of
St. Andrews and the abbot of Arbroath is preserved to us in the
chartulary of that church, regarding the lands of Fyvy, Tarves,
Innerbondy, Munclere, Gamery, Inverugy, and Monedin, and the _Can_ or
redditus and _Conevet_ of these lands, which the bishop resigns to the
abbot free of every exaction, reserving to himself the ancient
‘redditus’ of Monedin, viz., three shillings and sixpence, and the
portion of the _Conevet_ which was wont to be paid at Bencorin or
Banchory; and in the same Chartulary there is a grant by King William to
the abbey of Arbroath of the ferry and ferrylands of Munros, to be held
free ‘ab exercitu et expeditione et operatione et auxilio et ab omnibus
consuetudinibus et omni servicio et exactione;’ and the earl of Angus
grants them the lands of Portincraig in similar terms, as free ‘ab
exercitu et expeditione et exactione multure et ab omnibus auxiliis et
geldis et omnibus serviciis et exactionibus;’ the ‘exercitus’ and
‘expeditio’ being the _Sluaged_ and _Feacht_ of the Gaelic
charters.[285]

Then in Fife we find in a rental of the earldom a certain _firma_ or
rent which is termed _Canus_, with ten shillings of the _Can_ of
Abernethy; and in Stratherne we find the bishops of Dunkeld confirming
to the canons of Inchaffray the lands of Maderty, which is called
_Abthan_, and the freedom from the _Cane_ and _Coneveth_ which the
clerics of Dunkeld were wont anciently to receive from these lands.

These notices will be sufficient to show that these Celtic burdens on
land prevailed over the whole of the country north of the Firths, on the
crown lands and those of the church, and on all lands which had not
become the subject of feudal grants.

Passing then to the country south of the Firths, we find them equally
prevalent, except in the great Anglic province of Lothian. Thus King
David grants to the church of Glasgow the whole tithe of his _Chan_ in
the beasts and pigs of Strathegrive and Cuninghame, Kyle and Carrick, in
each year, unless the king himself shall go to dwell there and consume
his own _Chan_.[286] These districts formed the greater part of the
ancient British kingdom of Strathclyde, and this was an appropriate
grant to the church of Glasgow, which had been its metropolitan church.
Then we find the lords of Galloway granting lands in that district to
the canons of Holyrood, free from all ‘_Can_ and _Cuneveht_ and from
every exaction, custom, and secular service;’[287] and finally, at a
court held by the judges of Galloway at Lanerch in the reign of King
William the Lion, in presence of the Lord of Galloway, it was adjudged
that ‘when the king ought to receive his _Can_ from Galloway he should
issue his breve to the _Mairs_ of Galloway, and the _Mairs_ should go
with the royal breve to the debtor of the _Can_ and exact the _Can_ from
him. If he fail to pay, the _Mair_ was to take the rod or staff, called
the king’s staff, and take a distress for the king’s _Can_, and if the
debtor removed the subject of the distress he was to pay for each ten
cows fifteen cows, besides a hundred cows _de misericordia_; but if he
delivered part of the _Can_, till after the Nativity he was to pay for
each cow four shillings of cow-tax, and for each pig sixteen pence, and
before the Nativity the debtor was to deliver cows worth forty pence,
and if he stated on oath that he had no pigs, he was to pay for each pig
seventeen pence.’[288]

This last notice will explain in some degree what the burden termed
_Cain_ or _Can_ really was, and how it was exacted. It consisted of a
portion of the produce of the land, in grain when it was arable land,
and in cattle and pigs when pasture land. It was in fact the outcome of
the _Bestighi_ or food-rent of the Irish laws, and the _Gwestva_ of the
Welsh laws, paid by every occupier of land to his superior. Over the
whole of Scotland, except in Lothian, it was a recognised burden upon
the crown lands and upon all land not held by feudal tenure, but it
ceased as soon as the possessor of the land was feudally invested. Thus
we find in the Moray Chartulary an agreement between the bishop of Moray
and Thomas de Thirlestan, who had received a feudal grant of the lands
of Abertarff, regarding a half-davach of land, which the bishop asserted
belonged to the church, and regarding the tithes of the royal _Can_
payable from the lands of Abertarff before his feudal investiture (_ante
infeodationem_). There is a similar agreement between the bishop and
James, son of Morgund, regarding certain lands in his fief of Abernethy,
and regarding the tithes of the _Can_ which was wont to be paid to the
king from these lands before his feudal investiture, and another between
the bishop and Gilbert the Hostiary regarding the tithes of the _Can_
which he was wont to pay annually to the king from the lands of
Strathbroc and Buleshe before his feudal investiture (_ante
infeodationem_).[289] The _Can_ or _Chan_ was so termed from the Gaelic
word _Cain_, the primary meaning of which was ‘law.’ It was the
equivalent of the Latin word _canon_, and like it was applied to any
fixed payment exigible by law.[290]

[Sidenote: Conveth.]

Conveth was the Irish _Coinmhedha_ or Coigny, derived, according to
O’Donovan, from _Coinmhe_, which signifies feast or refection. It was
the _Dovraeth_ of the Welsh laws, and was founded upon the original
right which the leaders in the tribe had to be supported by their
followers. It came to signify a night’s meal or refection given by the
occupiers of the land to their superior when passing through his
territory, which was exigible four times in the year, and when the tribe
territory came to be recognised as crown land, it became a fixed food
contribution charged upon each ploughgate of land. Thus in the charter
by King Malcolm the Fourth, confirming the foundation of the abbey of
Scone, he grants to the canons from each ploughgate of the whole land of
the church of Scone in each year, at the Feast of All Saints, for their
_Coneveth_, one cow and two pigs, and four _Camni_ of meal, and ten
threaves of oats, and ten hens and two hundred eggs, and ten bundles of
candles, and four pounds of soap, and twenty half meales of cheese.[291]

In the reign of Alexander the Third this word seems to have assumed the
form of _Waytinga_, and appears in the Chamberlain Rolls of his reign as
a burden upon the Thanages. Thus the Chamberlain renders an account of
the _Waytingas_ of Forfar and Glammis, of the _Waytinga_ of one night of
Fettercairn, of the _Waytingas_ of four nights in the year of Kinross,
and ‘of the rent of cows of two years,’ that is to say, of the
_Waytingas_ of two nights in the year of Forfar, forty-eight cows, and
of the _Waytinga_ of (one) and a half nights of the Thanage of Glammis,
twenty-seven cows.[292]

Another name for this exaction was _Cuidoidhche_, or a night’s portion,
corrupted into _Cuddiche_ or _Cuddicke_. It appears under this name
mainly in the Highlands and Islands, and was continued as a burden on
the lands to a late period. In the rentals of South and North Kintyre
for 1505 we find, besides _firma_ or rent, each township charged with a
certain amount of meal, cheese, oats, and a mert or cow, _pro le
Cuddecht_. A description of the Western Isles written between 1577 and
1595, has preserved a record of these payments. Lewis, a forty pound
land, pays yearly 18 score chalders of victuall, 58 score of ky, 32
score of wedderis, and a great quantity of fishe, poultry, and white
plaiding by their _Cuidichies_—that is, feasting their master when he
pleases to come in the country, each one their night or two nights
about, according to their land or labour. In Uist each merk land paid 20
bolls victual, besides other customs which are paid at the landlord’s
coming to the Isle to his _Cudicht_; and in Mull each merk land paid
yearly 5 bolls bear, 8 bolls meal, 20 stones of cheese, 4 stones of
butter, 4 marts, 8 wedders, 2 merks of silver, and 2 dozen of poultrie
by _Cuddiche_, whenever their master comes to them. Under the name of
_Conyow_ or Coigny it appears in Iona, when, in a contract between the
bishop of the Isles and Lauchlan M‘Lean of Dowart, in 1580, the latter
becomes bound that he ‘sall suffer na maner of persoun or personis to
oppress the saidis landis of Ycolmekill (Iona) and Rosse, or tenantis
thaireof or trouble or molest thame in ony sort with ather stenting,
_Conyow_, gerig service or ony maner of exactioun.’[293] In Atholl we
find the vassals of Strathtay and their tenants ordered as late as in
1719 to pay their _Cudeichs_ according to ancient use and wont. These
included two pecks of corn, one threave of straw, and six shillings
Scots for maintenance of the superior’s horses and servants who wait on
them, out of each twenty shilling land; and in 1720 it is ordered that
the accustomed corn and straw and other casualties paid yearly as
_Cuddeichs_ out of each merk land be taken up, excepting always the land
laboured by the vassals for their own use.

A similar burden under different names emerges in Galloway, when in a
charter by David II. to Sir John Heris, knight of the barony of
Terreglis, in Dumfriesshire, in which it is declared ‘free of _Sorryn_
and _Fachalos_ unless officers come through it with a robber or with the
head of a robber; and if they, the king’s officers, can pass beyond the
barony before sunsetting, they shall have nothing for their expenses,
and if they cannot pass beyond the barony before sunsetting they shall
have hospitality for that night (_hospicium ad hospitandum_),’ etc.
_Sorren_ was a tax imposed in Ireland upon the possession of land for
the clothing, feeding, and supporting the galloglasses and kernes. It
was originally a night’s meal upon land passed through, and _Fachalos_
was probably the Irish _Fechtfele_, which is explained as ‘the first
night’s entertainment we receive at each other’s house.’[294]

[Sidenote: Expedition and hosting.]

The _Feacht_ and _Sluaged_ (_expeditio et exercitus_) consisted of a
general obligation, originally upon the members of the tribe, and
afterwards upon the possessors and occupiers of what had been tribe
territory, to follow their superiors and chiefs as well as the _Ardri_
or sovereign in his expeditions and wars. They are usually termed
expedition and hosting, and in Scotland the burden was apportioned upon
the davach of land. It is probably this burden that is referred to in
the Book of Deer, where we are told that the ‘_Mormaer_ and _Toisech_
immolated all the offerings to God and to devotion, and to Saint
Columcille and to Peter the Apostle, free from all the burdens, for a
portion of four davachs of what would come on the chief tribe residences
generally and on the chief churches.’ These obligations seem to have
constituted what is called in charters Scottish service (_servitium
Scoticanum_), and were of two kinds, internal and external, the one
representing the _Feacht_ or expedition, and the other the _Sluaged_ or
hosting. We find them distinguished in a charter by Waldevus de
Stratheihan to the church of St. Andrews of the lands of Blaregeroge,
which are granted ‘free from all exaction and service, internal and
external’ (_sine omne exactione et servitio intrinseco et
forinseco_);[295] and their connection with the Davach appears very
clearly from three Charters, one by Alexander II. to the abbey of Scone
of the lands of Magna et Parva Blar, which contains in the reddendo the
clause, ‘rendering the external service only which pertains to five
davachs of land, that pertaining to the sixth davach being
remitted.’[296] In another by the Earl of Stratherne to Willelmus de
Moravia, the lands are granted free of ‘every service except the
external Scottish service of our lord the king;’[297] and in a third
charter by Alexander the Second to the abbey of Arbroath of the lands of
Tarvays, consisting of four davachs and a half davach and quarter
davach, they are granted ‘rendering the external service in the army
which pertains to the said lands.’[298] We have seen that the
_Feachtmara_ or sea expedition of each tribe in ancient Dalriada was
attached to each twenty houses, corresponding to the twenty penny lands
which formed the davach in the west, showing very clearly that even at
this early period the Davach was the measure of land by which this
burden was regulated.

Such, then, were the burdens connected with the ancient tribal
organisation as depicted in the Irish and Welsh Laws which we find still
attached to the thanages, as well as to all the crown and church lands
not held on a feudal tenure. They consisted of, first, a share of the
produce of the land and the stock, of the personal services of certain
of the tenants, and of various fines, which were all included in the
general term of _Cain_; secondly, of rights of entertainment and support
for a certain number of nights in the year, under the name of
_Coinmhedha_ or _Coneveth_, _Cuidoidhche_ or _Cuddechie_, _Waytinga_,
_Sorren_, and _Fachalos_, and assessed on homesteads or penny lands in
the west, twenty of which made a davach; and on Carucates or ploughlands
in the east, four of which constituted the davach; thirdly, of the
_Feacht_ or expedition,—the burden of joining in expeditions within the
kingdom or territory; and fourthly, of the _Sluaged_ or Scottish service
of hosting,—that is, the burden of attending the king’s army or host
when assembled for the defence of the kingdom or for hostile invasion;
and of all these burdens the various grades connected with the land had
their _Cuid_ or share in definite proportions.

[Sidenote: Assimilation to feudal forms.]

These old Celtic tenures, however, became gradually more and more
assimilated to feudal forms as the kingdom with its mixed population
assumed more the aspect of a feudal monarchy, and its kings adapted the
customs of their subjects of different race to the model of those of the
feudal law. In this progress of adaptation we can trace two distinct
stages,—one when the crown lands came to be considered as held upon a
distinct tenure termed in England fee-farm, in Scotland feu-farm, and in
Latin charters _feodifirma_; and again, when the War of Independence
which followed on the death of the last of the kings of the race of
Malcolm Ceannmor and the contest between the houses of Bruce and Baliol
led to numerous confiscations of the land held by their partisans on
both sides, and to the general conversion of the crown grants into
feudal tenures for military service.

[Sidenote: Tenure in feu-farm.]

The tenure of crown lands in _feodifirma_, or feu-farm, appears in
England as early as the reign of King John, and must have then been
already well established, as one of the stipulations in the articles of
the Barons which led to the great charter of liberties or Magna Charta,
and repeated in the latter, is, that if any one holds of the king _per
feodifirmam_, or on _sokage_ or burgage tenure, and of another for
military service, the king is not to have the custody of the heir or of
his land who holds of another in fee by reason of his fee-farm, sokage,
or burgage holding of the king, nor shall he have the custody of the
latter unless the fee-farm owes military service;[299] and in Scotland
it was evidently recognised as a tenure holding of the Crown in the
reigns of William the Lion and of Alexander the Second. The tenure in
feu-farm or _feodifirma_ was in fact an intermediate tenure between
those who had merely the usufruct of land the right of property in which
still remained with the granter, and those who held land as his vassal
by a formal feudal grant for military service. Of the two words of which
the name is composed, _Firma_—derived from the Saxon _feorm_—was the
share of the produce of the land paid by a tenant to his landlord by way
of rent; and to hold land _ad firmam_ or _in firma_ was equivalent to
the modern leasehold tenure: it was constituted by a lease and completed
by possession, and the tenant was called _firmarius_; but _feodum_ is
the feudal fief granted by charter and completed by seisin or
infeftment. The tenure _in feodifirma_, therefore, was a feudal grant of
land, not for military service, but for a _firma_ or permanent rent, and
was equally constituted by charter and seisin. Such lands were held _ad
feodifirmam_, the annual payment was the _feodifirma_, and the holder
was called _feodifirmarius_. These grants were supposed to resemble the
Roman _Emphyteusis_, and the form still exists in Scotland in our modern
feu-charter, in which the same expressions are used. In these the land
is conveyed ‘in feu-farm, to be held in feu-farm fee and heritage for
ever,’ for payment of an annual ‘feu-duty,’ and the granter is called
the ‘feuar.’ It is, however, essentially a feudal holding, and differs
from a mere tenancy by lease in this—that in the former the _dominium
utile_ of the land is conveyed by charter to the vassal, while in the
latter the usufruct of the land is solely given, and the property of the
soil remains with the granter.[300]

[Sidenote: Ranks of society on Crown lands.]

When the thanage came to be considered as crown land it assumed an
appearance, with its thane holding it under the Crown and paying a share
of the produce as _Cain_, which was so analogous to that of the feu-farm
holding, that when feudal forms became more generally adopted it almost
unavoidably passed over into the latter; and it is at this stage of the
history of the thanage, when it was universally recognised as a feu-farm
holding, that the very important description of the tenure of crown
lands given us by Fordun in his Chronicle, to which we have already
adverted, more directly applies. We must now examine this description
more in detail.

Fordun divides the possessors and occupiers of the crown lands into
three classes, beginning his description with the lowest class, and
proceeding through the different ranks till he reaches the Thane; but it
will be more convenient for our purpose to invert the order in which he
describes them. He introduces his description by stating that the kings
were accustomed of old to give to their soldiers more or less of their
lands in feu-farm a thanage or portion of some province, of which,
however, he gave to each as it pleased him. Then follow the three
classes. The highest he terms _principes_, _thani_, and _milites_. To
these, who were few in number, he gave the land in perpetuity, but under
the burden of a certain annual payment to the king. The word _principes_
here, probably, means the earls of those ancient earldoms who
represented the old _Mormaers_, and whose demesne was held to have been
originally part of the crown land.[301] The _thani_ represented the
older _Toschachs_, and here we find the _Toschachs_ or thanes holding
the demesne of the thanage of the king in feu-farm, and paying an annual
feu-duty, first in kind, and retaining its original name of _Cain_, but
afterwards commuted to a money payment. Accordingly, in the laws of
William the Lion and of Alexander the Second we find them in the
position of crown vassals holding of the king _in capite_. Thus in an
assize held at Perth by King William the Lion there were present the
bishops, abbots, earls, barons, thanes, and whole community or estates
of the kingdom. Again, a law passed in A.D. 1220, regarding persons
absenting themselves from the king’s army, mentions those belonging to
the lands of bishops, abbots, barons, knights, and thanes who hold of
the king.[302] By _milites_, Fordun here means those who held a portion
of the thanage termed a tenement or tenandry, either direct from the
king, or, as was more usual, under the thane or lord as a sub-vassal, as
distinguished from the demesne.[303] These formed the class termed
freeholders or _libere tenentes_, and were bound to yield certain
services as suit and service in the court of the overlord and Scottish
service to the king. This class is frequently alluded to in the laws
both of William the Lion and of Alexander the Second. Thus in a statute
of King William the Lion in 1180, regarding the holding of barony
courts, it is provided that neither bishops nor abbots, nor earls nor
barons, nor any freeholders (_libere tenentes_) shall hold courts unless
the king’s sheriff is summoned, etc. Again, in a statute regarding
justice and sheriff moots, we have barons, knights (_milites_), and
freeholders (_libere tenentes_) classed together; and a statute
regarding the mode of citation refers to persons cited to attend the
moots of the justiciary shiref, baron, vavasour (that is, of one holding
of a baron), or of any freeholder (_libere tenentis_) that has a court.
Then a declaration regarding the freedom of the Church is made by King
William at Scone, with the common consent and deliberation of the
prelates, earls, barons, and freeholders (_libere tenentium_); and
finally there is a statute by the same king that the earls, barons, and
freeholders (_libere tenentes_) of the realm shall keep peace and
justice among their serfs, and that they shall live as lords from their
lands, rents, and dues, and not as husbandmen or sheep-farmers, wasting
their property and the country with a multitude of sheep and beasts,
thereby troubling God’s people with penury, poverty, and destruction;
this curious statute showing not only the position of the _libere
tenentes_ as proprietors, but that there was a tendency even at this
early period to withdraw land from culture and convert it into pasture
land.[304] Then in the Statutes of Alexander the Second there is one _de
modo duelli secundum conditionem personarum_, in which reference is made
to the _miles_ or knight, or son of a knight, or any _libere tenens_ or
freeholder in _feodo militari_ or knight’s fee. Again, in another law,
the king statutes that if any _miles_ or knight shall be indicted by
inquest, he shall pass through an assize of good and leil knights, or of
freeholders of heritage (_libere tenentium hereditarie_);[305] and their
position is clearly indicated by a provision in the Quoniam
attachiamenta, that any freeholder (_libere tenens_) whose tenement is
by his infeftment free from all service, shall fall to a lady by reason
of her terce, and unwittingly did service to her, shall not be liable in
similar service to his superior.[306] This view of the position of the
_libere tenentes_ as freeholders holding land under the thane or baron
as sub-vassals of the Crown, is corroborated by a few charters which may
be noticed. Thus Robertus de Keth, lord of the same and of the barony of
Troup and Marischall of Scotland, grants certain lands within the barony
of Troup to his son John de Keth, with the bondmen, bondages,
native-men, and their followers, but reserving to himself the
superiority and service of the freeholders (_libere tenentium_) of the
lands of Achorthi, Curvi, and Hayninghill, lying within the barony of
Troup. Again, Morgund, son of Albe, grants to his son Michael one davach
of his land of Carncors in Buchan, to be held of himself in fee and
heritage for ever, as freely as any freeman (_liber homo_) can grant
land; and Alexander Cumyn, Earl of Buchan, grants to Fergus, son of John
de Fothes, the tenement of Fothes, with its bondmen, bondages,
native-men, and their followers, to be held of himself and his heirs in
fee and heritage for ever, as freely as any freeman (_liber homo_) can
hold (_tenet_) any tenement of any earl or baron within the kingdom,
rendering such form in service to the king as pertains to their lands,
and a half-pound of wax to us and our heirs in lieu of all secular
service or demand which we can exact in future.[307]. This class appears
to be meant by the _Ogethearn_ of the old laws, who ranked next after
the thane.[308]

The second of Fordun’s groups consists of those whom he terms _liberi et
generosi_, who held portions of land either for ten or for twenty years
or during life, with remainder to one or two heirs. These were the
tenants in the modern sense of the term. The former were the _liberi
firmarii_ of the statutes, or free farmers, and the latter the kindlie
tenants or tacksmen, who were usually near relations of the lord of the
land, and when they had a liferent possession of land, occupied an
intermediate position between the _libere tenentes_ or freeholders and
the _firmarii_ or farmers, and may in fact be classed with either.[309]
We find in this group a resemblance to the _Ceile_ or tenants of the
Irish Laws in two respects. First, in the steelbow tenancy, by which
many of these tenants held their land, and were sometimes called
steelbow-men. By this tenure the landlord provided the stock and
implements called steelbow goods, which were transferred to the tenant
on valuation; and he was bound on the termination of his lease to return
stock and implements to the same value, while the rent paid for the land
was higher in proportion to the value of the steelbow goods. Secondly,
the smallest possession held by a free farmer appears to have been two
bovates or oxgangs of land, or the fourth of a ploughgate, called in
some parts of the country a husband-land; and we find that in the north
of Scotland the name of _Rath_ was given to this portion of land, a name
which in the Irish Laws signified the homestead, which formed the lowest
single tenancy. Thus William, son of Bernard, grants to the monks of
Arbroath ‘two bovates of land, which are called _Rath_ (_que vocantur
Rathe_), of the territory of Katerlyn (in Kincardineshire), with the
right to pasture twenty beasts and four horses on the common pasture of
Katerlyn; and the same person grants to the monks two other bovates of
land in the territory of Katerlyn, consisting of seven acres of land
adjoining their land which is called _Rathe_, on the north, and nineteen
acres of land adjoining these seven acres on the seaside towards the
east, under that culture which is termed _Treiglas_, thus making up the
twenty-six acres of which a husbandland consisted.’[310] The word _Rath_
enters largely into the topography of Scotland, under the forms of
_Rait_, as in Logierait; _Ra_, as in Ramorny; _Rothy_, as in Rothiemay
and Rothiemurchus, anciently _Rathmorchus_.

The last of Fordun’s groups consists of those termed _Agricolœ_ or
husbandmen, holding land from year to year for rent (_ad firmam_). They
are distinguished from the _liberi_ or freemen, and belonged to the
class of holders of servile tenements termed in the laws _Rustici_. This
class of servile tenants seems to form the object of the first laws made
by Alexander the Second on his accession in A.D. 1214. They are issued
at Scone, with the common council of his earls, for the profit of the
country, and provide that the ‘_Rustici_ in those places and townships
in which they were the previous year shall exercise their agriculture
and not neglect their own profit, but shall begin to plough and sow
their lands with all diligence fifteen days before the Feast of the
Purification (second of February); and that those _Agrestes_ who have
more than four cows shall take land from their lord and plough and sow
it, to provide sustenance for them and theirs; and those who have less
than five cows may not use them in ploughing, but shall labour the land
with hands and feet, trenching and sowing as much as is necessary for
the sustenance of them and theirs. Those that have oxen shall sell them
to those that have land to plough and sow. Earls not allowing those who
have such lands on their earldoms to do so shall forfeit eight cows to
the king; and if any one holding of the king shall neglect to do so, he
shall forfeit eight cows to the king. If he hold of an earl, he shall
give the earl eight cows. If he be a serf, his lord shall take from him
one cow and one sheep, and thenceforth shall force him who will not do
it of free will; and the king adds the following warning to them to take
heed that that does not happen to them which is taught in parables. He
who will not plough in winter owing to severe cold shall beg in summer,
and it shall not be given him, but rather according to the judgment of
the apostle—Let them labour with their hands, working what is good, that
they may have to give to those who are in necessity.’[311]

The thanage then consisted, like all baronies, of two parts, demesne and
that part given off as freeholds (_libera tenementa_) or tenandries. The
demesne was held by the Thane of the king in feu-farm, and cultivated by
the servile class, the bondmen and native-men, and the tenandries were
either held of him in fee and heritage by the sub-vassals called
freeholders or _libere tenentes_, or occupied by the kindlie tenants and
free farmers.

Such was their position prior to the death of Alexander the Third, the
last king of the old dynasty, and a similar description would apply to
those thanages which did not form part of the crown lands, but were held
under earls of the ancient earldoms north of the Forth as part of their
demesne,[312] or of the Church.

-----

Footnote 1:

  De toto regno, de insula Manniæ et de omnibus aliis insulis ad dictum
  regnum Scotiæ pertinentibus necnon et de Tyndallia et de Penereth cum
  aliis omnibus juribus et libertatibus ad dictum dominum Regem Scotiæ
  spectantibus.—Rym. _Fœd._ ii. p. 266.

Footnote 2:

  For this sketch of the attempts of the Scottish kings to obtain
  possession of these northern provinces, Hailes’s _Annals_ and Vol. I.
  of this work may be consulted.

Footnote 3:

  Rymer’s _Fœdera_; Palgrave, _Records_, vol. i. pp. ii. 1.

Footnote 4:

  Dominus autem rex, circa festum S. Michaelis (A.D. 1211) rediens inde
  cum manu valida, Malcolmum comitem de Fyfe Moraviæ custodem
  dereliquit.... Erat enim tunc temporis ipse (Willelmus Cumyn Comes de
  Buchan) Custos Moraviæ.—_Scotichron._ B. viii. c. lxxvi.

Footnote 5:

  It is thus described by Dio in the reign of the Emperor Severus.

Footnote 6:

  Adamnan, _Vit. Columbæ_.

Footnote 7:

  Provinciis septentrionalium Pictorum, hoc est, eis quæ arduis atque
  horrentibus montium jugis ab australibus eorum sunt regionibus
  sequestratæ. Namque ipsi australes Picti, qui intra eosdem montes
  habent sedes.—_Hist. Ec._ lib. iii. cap. iv.

Footnote 8:

  De situ Albaniæ quæ in se figuram hominis habet.—_Chron. Picts and
  Scots_, p. 135.

Footnote 9:

  Brevis Descriptio regni Scotiæ.—_Ib_. 214.

Footnote 10:

  Fordun’s _Chronicle of Scotland_, B. ii. cc. vii. and viii. vol. ii.
  pp. 36-7.

Footnote 11:

  Coadunatus autem erat iste nefandus exercitus de Normannis, Germanis,
  Anglis, de Northymbranis et Cumbris, de Teswetadala, de Lodonea, de
  Pictis, qui vulgo Galleweienses dicuntur, et Scottis.—Ric. Hagustald.
  _ad an_. 1138.

Footnote 12:

  Fordun’s _Chron._ vol. i. App. I.

Footnote 13:

  Qui duce Reuda de Hibernia progressi vel amicitia vel ferro sibimet
  inter eos sedes quas hactenus habent, vindicarent.—_Bede_, i. c. 1.

Footnote 14:

  Dicto namque Kentegerno pluribusque successoribus suis pie religionis
  perseverantia ad Deum transmigratis, diverse seditiones circumquaque
  insurgentes, non solum Ecclesiam et ejus possessiones destruxerunt,
  verum etiam totam regionem vastantes, ejus habitatores exilio
  tradiderunt. Sic ergo omnibus bonis exterminatis, magnis temporum
  intervallis transactis, diverse tribus diversarum nationem ex diversis
  partibus affluentes, desertam regionem prefatam habitaverunt; sed
  dispari genere et dissimili lingua et vario more viventes, haud facile
  [inter] sese consentientes, gentilitatem potius quam fidei cultum
  tenuere. Quos infelices dampnate habitationis habitatores, more
  pecudum irrationabiliter degentes, dignatus est Dominus, Qui neminem
  vult perire, propitiatione Sua visitare; tempore enim Henrici Regis
  Anglie, Alexandro Scotorum rege in Scotia regnante, misit eis Deus
  David, predicti Regis Scotie germanum, in principem et ducem; qui
  eorum impudica et scelerosa contagia corrigeret, et animi nobilitate
  et inflexibili severitate contumeliosam eorum contumatiam
  refrenaret.—Haddan and Stubbs, _Councils_, vol. ii. part i. p. 17.

Footnote 15:

  This chronicle was printed from the Book of Aberpergwm in the
  _Myvyrian Archæology_, vol. ii., and reprinted, with a translation, in
  the _Archæologia Cambrensis_, vol. ix., Third Series, but its
  authority is very doubtful.

Footnote 16:

  When Kentigern was preaching to the pagan people at Hoddam, in
  Dumfriesshire, the chief point of his sermon was to show them that
  their god Woden had been a mere man.—See Paper on Early Frisian
  Settlements, _Proceedings Ant. Scot._, vol. iv. p. 169.

Footnote 17:

  Fourth Report of Hist. MSS. Com., App. p. 493.

Footnote 18:

  _Chart. Scon_, p. 24.

Footnote 19:

  Fordun, _Chron._ (Annals, IV.) ed. 1872, vol. ii. p. 251.

Footnote 20:

  The names Dubhgall and Finngall must not be confounded, as is usually
  done, with the Christian names Dubhgal and Fingal, which belong to a
  large class of names ending with the syllable _gal_, signifying
  _valour_.

Footnote 21:

  There is no foundation for the usual statement that the Sudreys meant
  merely the islands south of the Point of Ardnamurchan, which is
  contradicted by the language of the Sagas.

Footnote 22:

  This is Munch’s opinion. See his _Chronicle of Man_, preface, p.
  xviii.

Footnote 23:

  _Annals of the Four Masters_, vol. i. p. 634.

Footnote 24:

  Dasent, _Saga of Burnt Njal_, vol. ii. pp. 12, 39, 40.

Footnote 25:

  Goffraig Meranach ri Gall mortuus est.—_An. Ult._ _ad an_. 1095.

  Atbath don mhortladh chetna (of the same pestilence died) Gofraidh
  Meranach tighearna Gall Athacliath agus na ninnsidh.—_Annals of the
  Four Masters_, vol. ii. p. 950.

Footnote 26:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 170.

Footnote 27:

  See translation of _Book of Clanranald_ in the Appendix, No. I.

Footnote 28:

  _Ib_.

Footnote 29:

  _Chron. of Man_, _ad an_. 1140.

Footnote 30:

  _Ib_.

Footnote 31:

  _Ib_.

Footnote 32:

  The author is indebted to W. M. Hennessey, Esq., of the Public Record
  Office, Dublin, for a copy of this poem, collated with one in his own
  possession. It is printed in the Appendix, No. II., along with a
  translation by Mr. Hennessey.

Footnote 33:

  _Ise in Manannan sin robai i n-arainn ocus as friaside adberar Emain
  Ablach_. It was this Manannan that resided in Arann, and this is the
  place which is called Eamania of the apple-trees.—_Yellow Book of
  Lecain, Atlantis_, vol. iv. p. 228.

Footnote 34:

  Principes Insularum.—_Chron. Manniæ._

Footnote 35:

  _Chron. Manniæ_, _ad an_.

Footnote 36:

  See _Act. Parl._, vol. i. p. 424.

Footnote 37:

  Puis est treitez et acordez de mettre quatre poire des Justices en la
  terre Descoce et pur ce que les choses soient mesnees de meillur array
  et plus a honur et au profite de nostre seignur le Roy et al aisement
  du poeple est assentu que en LOENEYS soient deux Justices, cest
  asavoir monsieur Johan del Isle et monsieur Adam de Gurdon. En
  GA[LO]WAY monsieur Roger de Kirkpatrick et monsieur Wautier de
  Burghdone. Et pur LES TERRES DELA LA MER DESCOCE, cest asavoir ENTRE
  LA RIVERE DE FORTH ET LES MONTZ monsieur Robert de KETH et monsieur
  William Inge. Et pur LES TERRES DELA LES MONTZ Monsieur Reynaud le
  Chien et Monsieur Johan de Vaux du Counte de Northumber.—_Act. Parl.
  Scot._, vol. i. p. 120.

Footnote 38:

  Fordun’s _Chron._, vol. ii. p. 38.

Footnote 39:

  Bede tells us (B. i. c. 12) that the Picts and Scots were termed
  transmarine nations, not because they came from beyond Britain, but
  because they belonged to that remote part of Britain beyond the two
  firths. The word Transmarine Scotland is adopted as a convenient term
  for Scotland beyond the Firths of Forth and Clyde.

Footnote 40:

  Defunctus est Palladius in Campo Girgin, in loco qui dicitur
  Forddun.—Colgan, _Tr. Th._ p. 13.

Footnote 41:

  _Book of Rights_, pp. 17 and 49.

Footnote 42:

  When the Pictish Chronicle tells us that the Norwegians were cut off
  in _Sraith-herne_ or Stratherne, the Irish Annals narrate the same
  event as a slaughter by the men of Fortren.—_Chron. Picts and Scots_,
  pp. 9. and 362.

Footnote 43:

  Across the Stockfurde into Ros.—_Wyntoun._

Footnote 44:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 136.

Footnote 45:

  693 _Bruidhe mac Bile Rex Fortrend moritur_.

  739 _Tolarcan mac Drostan rex Athfhotla a bathadh la h’Angus_ (drowned
  by Angus).—_Tigh. Ib._ pp. 75, 76.

Footnote 46:

  1020 Findlaec mac Ruaidri Mormaer Moreb.—_Tigh._ Findlaec mac Ruadri
  Ri Alban.—_An. Ult._

Footnote 47:

  Et si ille qui calumpniatus est de catallo furato vel rapto vocat
  warentum suum aliquem hominem manentem inter Spey et Forth vel inter
  Drumalban et Forth habeat ab illo die quo calumpniatus fuerit xv. dies
  ad producendum warentum suum qui infra dictas divisas maneat ad locum
  sicut Rex David constituit in comitatu ubi calumpnia tus fuerit. Et si
  quis ultra illas divisas velut in Moravia vel in Ros vel in Katenes
  vel in Ergadia vel in Kentyre vocaverit warentos habeat omnes warentos
  illos quos habere debuit ab ultimo die quindecem dierum predictorum in
  unam mensem ad locum ubi ipse qui calumpniatus est de catallo furato
  vel rapto cum catallo adductus erit. Et si calumpniatus venerit pro
  warento suo qui maneat vel in Moravia vel in Ros vel in Katenes vel in
  _Ergadia que pertinet ad Moraviam_ nec illum habere poterit tunc
  veniat ad vicecomitem de Invirnisse, etc....

  Item si calumpniatus vocaverit warentum aliquem in _Ergadia que
  pertinet ad Scotiam_ tunc veniat ad Comitem Atholie vel ad Abbatem de
  Clendrochard, etc.—_Act. Parl._ vol. i. p. 372.

  Dominus Rex pro pace et stabilitate regni sui observanda statuit et
  ordinavit quod de terris subscriptis fient videlicet De _terra Comitis
  de Ros in Nort Argail_.—_Ib_. _ad an_. 1292, vol. i. p. 447.

Footnote 48:

  The term Scotti Picti is here evidently a rendering of the name of
  _Gwyddyl Ffichti_, by which the Picts were known to the Welsh, and the
  allusion to their return from Ireland refers to the tradition of their
  settlement as given by Bede.

Footnote 49:

  Reeves’s _Adamnan_, p. 397.

Footnote 50:

  _Orkneyinga Saga_, p. 181.

Footnote 51:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 363.

Footnote 52:

  _Ib._ p. 9.

Footnote 53:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 77.

Footnote 54:

  See vol. i. p. 387, note 5. _War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill_, p.
  153.

Footnote 55:

  Olaf Tryggvesson’s Saga. _Collect. de reb. Alb._, p. 333.

Footnote 56:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, 77, 78, and 367.

Footnote 57:

  _Saxon Chron._ _ad an_. 1031. See also vol. i. p. 397, note 22.

Footnote 58:

  Anderson’s _Orkneyinga Saga_, p. 28, note. The author has no doubt
  that Munch’s conjecture is correct. The expression ‘where Scotland and
  England meet’ must not be too strictly construed, but it evidently
  places the locality on the southern frontier of Scotland. That
  Gallgaedhel is geographically Galloway appears from this, that the
  deaths of Roland and Allan, Lords of Galloway, which took place in
  1199 and 1234, are recorded in the Irish Annals under the title of _Ri
  Gallgaedhel_.

Footnote 59:

  1040 Donnchad rex Scotiæ in autumno occiditur a duce suo Macbethad mac
  Finnlaech, cui succesit in regnum.—(Marianus Scotus.) _Chron. Picts
  and Scots_, p. 65.

Footnote 60:

  _Collect. de reb. Alb._, pp. 345, 346.

Footnote 61:

  _Col. de Reb. Alb._, p. 346.

Footnote 62:

  Bower says of Alexander I.—‘Quod patruus suus comes de Gowry dedit
  sibi ad donum, ut moris est in baptismo, terras de Lyff et Invergowry’
  (_Scotichron._ B. v. chap. xxxvi.), which shows that during the life
  of Malcolm III. one of his brothers possessed Gowry. Then we find that
  Madach, who ruled over Atholl as earl in the reign of Alexander I. and
  David I., was the son of Melmare, brother of Malcolm III., and his son
  Edelradus is designated in a charter of Admore in Kinross-shire ‘Abbas
  de Dunkelden et insuper comes de Fife’ (_Chart. St. Andrews_, p. 115),
  thus uniting the possession of the abbacy of Dunkeld, the patrimony of
  this royal family, with the earldom of Fife.

Footnote 63:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, pp. 370, 372.

Footnote 64:

  _Dobharcu_, of which Dobharcon is the genitive form, signifies
  literally water-dog, and is the name usually given to an otter.

Footnote 65:

  The words _agus ise Mormaer agus ise Toisech_. This has been
  translated as if it meant that Mondac was both Mormaer and Toisech,
  while Comgall is left without a designation, but the above is the
  obvious meaning.

Footnote 66:

  In the above notice from the Book of Deer the reader is referred to
  the edition of it printed for the Spalding Club under the able care of
  the late Dr. John Stuart. The facts they disclose are given here
  merely, and the explanation must be reserved to a subsequent chapter.

Footnote 67:

  _Chart. Scon_, p. 2.

Footnote 68:

  Ailred De bello apud Standardum, printed in appendix to Fordun,
  _Chron._, vol. i. p. 443.

Footnote 69:

  _Orkneyinga Saga_, p. 86.

Footnote 70:

  Compare the subscriptions to the Scone charter, ‘Ego Alexander Dei
  Gratia Rex Scotorum propria manu mea hec confirmo ... ego Sibilla Dei
  Gratia Regina Scottorum propria manu hec confirmo, ego Gregorius
  episcopus, etc., confirmo, ego Cormacus episcopus, etc., confirmo, ego
  Beth comes similiter, ego Gospatricius Dolfini assensum prebeo, ego
  Mallus comes assensum prebeo, ego Madach comes assensum prebeo, ego
  Rothri comes assensum prebeo, ego Gartnach comes assensum prebeo, ego
  Dufagan comes assensum prebeo (_Chart. Scon_, p. 2), with the
  following Saxon charters:—‘Ego Æthelbalth (Mercensium Rex) hanc
  donationem meam subscripsi. Ego Uuor Episcopus consensi et subscripsi.
  Piot abbas. Uuilfirth comes. Sigibed comes. Oba comes. Beorcol comes.
  Heardberht frater Regis Eadberht comes, etc. Or another in 823—‘Ego
  Eagbertus Rex Anglorum hanc donationem meam, etc., confirmavi et
  subscripsi. Ego Ætheluulf Rex consensi et subscripsi. Ego Uulfred
  Archiepiscopus consensi et subscripsi. Ego Wigthegn Episcopus consensi
  et subscripsi. Ego Ealhstan Episcopus consensi et subscripsi. Ego
  Bearnmod Episcopus consensi et subscripsi. Ego Wulfhard Dux consensi
  et subscripsi. Ego Monuede Dux consensi et subscripsi. Ego Osmod Dux
  consensi et subscripsi. Ego Dudda Dux consensi et subscripsi,
  etc.—Palgrave, _Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth_, vol.
  ii. pp. ccxix. ccxx.

Footnote 71:

  _Chart. of Dunfermlin_, p. 4.

Footnote 72:

  _Ib_. p. 16.

Footnote 73:

  _Chart. of St. Andrews_, pp. 116, 117.

Footnote 74:

  Mr. Robertson, in his valuable work of _Scotland under her Early
  Kings_, considers that Beth in the Scone charter is written by a
  clerical error for Heth, that he is the same person with the Ed and
  Head of David’s charters, and was Earl of Moray, and father of that
  Angus, Earl of Moray, defeated and slain in 1130 (vol. i. pp. 104,
  190). This opinion is mainly grounded on the fact that Wimund, when he
  claimed to be the son of Angus, called himself Malcolm MacHeth, but
  Beth appears in the same form in a subsequent charter in the Scone
  chartulary (p. 4), and an identification, which requires us to suppose
  that the name has been miswritten in two charters, is not admissible.
  Moreover, it is not likely that an Earl of Moray should witness the
  foundation-charter of a monastery erected as a thank-offering for the
  defeat of the men of Moray in that year. As the great province of Fif
  consisted of the two old districts of Fyfe and Fothrithi, it is not
  impossible that there may at first have been an Earl connected with
  each, and that Beth, occupying here the leading place in which the
  subsequent Earls of Fife are invariably found, may have been earl
  along with Edelrad, and that the latter is the Ed who, along with
  Constantin, witnesses the earliest charter of King David, as there is
  a circumflex through the d of Ed, which implies that some letters
  after it have been omitted. This would account for Constantin
  appearing in the charter of Edelrad as if he were his contemporary. It
  may be observed that the Admore which Edelrad grants was in Fothrif,
  while Constantin appears in connection with Kirkcaldy in Fife, and
  that the name of the Thane of Falkland being Macbeath, shows that the
  name Beath was also connected with Fife. Head may certainly have been
  the Earl of Moray who preceded Angus, and gave his name to the family
  of MacHeth.

Footnote 75:

  See charter by Alexander the Second to Earl Malcolm of Fife, son of
  Duncan, Earl of Fife, of the comitatus de Fyfe. ‘Sicut Comes Duncanus
  frater suus comitatem illum tenuit ... Sicut carta regis David de
  predicto comitatu facta comiti Duncano patri ejus.’—_National MSS._
  vol. i. p. 28.

Footnote 76:

  Fordun, _Chron._ (Annals, III.) vol. ii. p. 251; and see note, p. 430.

Footnote 77:

  ‘Ingibiorg, the mother of the earls,’ married Melkolf, king of
  Scotland, who was called Langhals. Their son was Dungad, king of
  Scotland, the father of William, who was a good man. His son was
  William the Noble, whom all the Scots wished to take for their
  king.—_Collect. de Reb. Alb._ 40, p. 346.

Footnote 78:

  Wyntoun, _Chron._ B. vii. c. vii.

Footnote 79:

  Memorandum quod Comes de Holand processit de sorore domini Regis
  Willelmi ut cognitum est per anticos regni Scotie quod totus comitatus
  de Ros, collatus fuit in maritagio cum predicta sorore domini Regis
  Willelmi et predictus comitatus elongatus fuit a predicto comite de
  Holand sine aliqua ratione et sine merito suo vel antecessorum suorum
  ut injuste sicut recognitum est.—Palgrave, _Documents and Records_, p.
  20.

Footnote 80:

  The principal act of Gilchrist’s life was the foundation of the Priory
  of Monimusk, and Thomas, the Doorward, confirms the grant by his
  grandfather and his mother. His son Alan declares, in 1257, that
  Morgund and his son Duncan were illegitimate, and in 1291 the Earl of
  Mar complains that when William the Lion restored the Earldom to
  Morgund, ‘deficiebant tres centum librate terre.’—_Ant. Ab. and
  Banff_, vol. iv. p. 151.

Footnote 81:

  This deed has hitherto been known only by its being printed by Selden
  in his _Titles of Honour_; but the document from which he printed was
  found among his papers, and is now in the library at Lincoln’s Inn.
  See Appendix No. IV. for an account of this charter.

Footnote 82:

  Fordun, _Chron._ (Annals, XXX.) vol. ii. p. 276.

Footnote 83:

  _Chart. of Paisley_, p. 167. The expressions used here imply that
  David held the earldom only for a time. The first mention of another
  earl of Lennox is in 1193, when Eth, son of the earl of Lennox,
  witnesses a charter in the _Liber de Melrose_, vol. i. p. 22, and that
  his name was Aluin appears from the _Chartulary of Glasgow_, vol. i.
  p. 86, where we find, between 1208 and 1214, a charter by Alewinus
  comes de Levenax filius et heres Alewini comitis de Levenax.

Footnote 84:

  Fordun, _Chron._ (Annals, XXIX.), p. 276.

Footnote 85:

  Willelmi Rishanger _Chronica et Annales_, Master of the Rolls Series,
  p. 344. The words ‘de chef mes’ are erroneously translated by the
  editor ‘of chief of the house,’ instead of ‘chief messuage.’

Footnote 86:

  Rishanger, _Chronica_, pp. 355, 356, 357.

Footnote 87:

  The decision is thus given in the arguments adduced by Baliol in
  support of the position that the kingdom was not partible. Printed by
  Palgrave (_Doc._, p. 40), unfortunately the document is very
  imperfect, but it appears to place the old Celtic earldom in the same
  category with the offices of seneschals, marischals, constables, and
  foresters:—

  ‘Ausi la Countee de Asheles demora a Isabele la einzne ... puisne n y
  aveit vivaunt Isabel l einzne soir e le isseue de li. E fet ...
  lavandit Isabel en pleyn Parlament devaunt le Rey Alexaundre fiz ...
  son counseil q ele ne deveit ceo par ... er por ceo qe Countee nest
  pas partable ... qe plus ... es ce ... vynt.... Escoce Seneschaucie
  Mareschaucie Conestablerie Foresterie. e ... einzne ... al isseue ...
  einznesce autres offices e baillies semblable qe sount de la coroune.’

Footnote 88:

  Pro dolor! Patricius de Athedle filius Thomæ de Galwedia et comitis de
  Adthedle, juvenis egregius et quantum ad humanam oppinionem omni
  curiali sapientia et facescia imbutus, apud Hadingtone in hospitio suo
  de nocte postquam se sopori dedisset, per consilium quorundam
  malignancium nequiter perimitur, cum duobus sociis suis.... Post cujus
  tamen obitum, David de Hastinges accepit ejus comitatum provenientem
  sibi ex parte uxoris sue, que erat matertera juvenis occisi.—_Chron.
  Mel._

Footnote 89:

  The history of these ancient earldoms is very inaccurately given by
  the Peerage-writers, and none more so than that of the earldom of
  Caithness. These errors will be found corrected in Appendix No. V.

Footnote 90:

  Palgrave, _Documents_, pp. 14, 15.

Footnote 91:

  Vol. i. p. 483.

Footnote 92:

  Vol. i. p. 486.

Footnote 93:

  See charter by David II., confirming in 1368 to Archibald Campbell,
  son of Colin, the lands of Craignish, Melfort, and others, with all
  the liberties thereof, as freely as Duncan Mac Duine, progenitor of
  the said Archibald Campbell, enjoyed the same in the barony of Lochaw,
  or other lands belonging to him.—_His. Com._, 4 Report, p. 40. The
  first Campbell on record is Gillespie Campbell in 1266, and this
  Duncan was his grandfather.

Footnote 94:

  Rymer’s _Fœdera_, vol. i. p. 257.

Footnote 95:

  Fordun, _Chron._, ed. 1874, vol. ii. p. 289, and note p. 436.

Footnote 96:

  Quo tempore septem Comites Scotiae, viz. de Bowan, de Meneteth, de
  Stradeherne, de Lewenes, de Ros, de Athel, de Mar, ac Johannes filius
  Johannis Comyn de Badenau, collecto exercitu valido in valle Annandie,
  feria secunda Paschæ Angliam ingressi, vastabant omnia cæde et
  incendio, et non parcentes ætati vel sexui venientes Carleolum urbem,
  ipsam obsidione cinxerunt.—Willelmi Rishanger _Chronica_, p. 156.

Footnote 97:

  Willelmi Rishanger _Chronica_, pp. 159, 160.

Footnote 98:

  Rymer’s _Fœdera_, ii. p. 471.

Footnote 99:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 291.

Footnote 100:

  Fordun, _Chronicle_, vol. ii. p. 177.

Footnote 101:

  _Regiam Majestatem_, p. i.

Footnote 102:

  This word _feodofirma_, called feu-farm in Scotland and fee-farm in
  England, is usually understood as meaning what is inconsistently
  called a hereditary lease, but it was not so at least in Scotland. It
  was a grant of the _feodum_ or fee of the estate, and not merely of
  the usufruct, burdened with an annual payment of a _firma_ or
  _census_, instead of military service.—See Fordun, vol. ii. p. 414
  note.

Footnote 103:

  This subject will be more fully discussed in a subsequent chapter.

Footnote 104:

  _Chart. Aberdeen_, vol. i. p. 55.

Footnote 105:

  Dominus Rex pro pace et stabilitate regni sui observandus statuit et
  ordinavit quod de terris subscriptis fient [vicecomitatus] videlicet.
  De terra comitis de Ros in Nort Argail, Terra de Glenc[elg] Terra
  Regis de Skey et Lodoux, octo davaux de terra [Garmoran] Egge et Rumme
  Guiste et Barrich cum minutis insulis et vocetur vicecomitatus de
  Skey.

  De terris Kinnebathyn Ardemuirich Bothelve, Terra Alexandri de
  Argadia, Terra Johannis de Glenurwy, Terra Gilberti Mc[Nauchton] Terra
  Malcolmi M‘Ivyr Terra Dugalli de Cragins Terra Johannis McGilcrist
  Terra Magistri Radulphi de Dunde, Terra Gileskel M‘Lachl[an] Terra
  Comitis de Meneteth de Knapedal, Terra Anegus filii Dovenaldi
  Insularum et Terra Colini Cambel et vocetur vicecomitatus de [Lorn].

  De terris de Kentyr cum omnibus tenentibus terras in eadem. Terra
  Lochmani McKilcolim McErewer Terra Enegus McErewer, Terra de ...
  Insula de Boot, Terra Domini Thomæ Cambel, et Terra Dunkani Duf et
  vocetur vicecomitatus de Kentyr.—_Acta Parl._ vol. i. p. 447.

Footnote 106:

  The account of these supposed colonies in all their subsequent
  elaboration will be found in the _Annals of the Four Masters_, and in
  Keating’s _History of Ireland_, which contains a very accurate
  representation of the Irish legends in regard to them.

Footnote 107:

  These names have a meaning connected with land, and probably personify
  the different kinds of tenure by which the land was held. _Er_ means
  noble; _Orba_, inheritance; _Fearann_, land in general; and _Feargna_,
  chieftainship.

Footnote 108:

  The word meant is _Lediaith_. In Welsh, identity of language was
  implied by _Cyfiaith_, dialectic difference by _Lediaith_, and
  difference of language by _Anghyviaith_.

Footnote 109:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, pp. 47, 48.

Footnote 110:

  In referring to the Cymric legends it is necessary to be careful as to
  the source from which they are derived. The literature of Wales has
  been unfortunately tainted to a large extent by spurious documents
  professing to be old, but in the main the creation of the eighteenth
  century, when a school of Welsh antiquaries existed, desirous of
  reproducing what they considered a sort of mystic Druidism supposed to
  have been handed down from pagan times by a successor of Baedi, and
  who were little scrupulous as to the means by which they promoted
  their object. Among the documents emerging from this school were the
  so-called Historical Triads, which the author rejects as spurious. A
  valuable and interesting work, the _Mabinogion_, by Lady Charlotte
  Guest, containing the ancient Welsh prose tales preserved in the Red
  Book of Hergest, unfortunately includes one of these spurious pieces,
  the Hanes Taliessin, among the genuine tales. The author announced in
  his _Four Ancient Books of Wales_ that this tale, though included in
  those said to be taken from the Red Book of Hergest, is not to be
  found in that MS., and is certainly a manufacture of the last century;
  while more spurious poems, attributed to Taliessin but not to be found
  in the Book of Taliessin, have been introduced into it, though not
  forming a part of it. He regrets to see that this spurious document is
  still included in the new edition of the _Mabinogion_ among the tales
  said to be taken from the Red Book of Hergest, as if the imposture had
  never been detected. It shows how difficult it is to purge the early
  historical literature of any country of such spurious matter when once
  it has been accepted as genuine.

Footnote 111:

  _Four Ancient Books of Wales_, vol. i. p. 276.

Footnote 112:

  Gildas, _Hist._ c. 25.

Footnote 113:

  Nennius, _Hist._ c. 42.

Footnote 114:

  Nennius, c. 56.

Footnote 115:

  This document is printed with a translation in the _The Four Ancient
  Books of Wales_, vol. ii. p. 455.

Footnote 116:

  See _Four Ancient Books of Wales_, vol. i. c. x., Cumbria, or the Men
  of the North, for a fuller account of these traditionary origins.

Footnote 117:

  The modern Welsh antiquaries in general regard the Picts as belonging
  to the Cymric race and speaking a Welsh dialect, but in this they run
  counter to their own early traditions, for both in their old poems and
  in prose documents there is a consensus as to their being a foreign
  race to the Cymry, and belonging to the people termed by them Gwyddyl.

  In the poems they are usually termed Brithwyr and Peithwyr, but also
  Gwyddyl Ffichti; thus the early Pictish inhabitants of Bernicia are
  thus alluded to—

                   Five chiefs then will he
                   Of the Gwyddyl Ffichti,
                   Of a sinner’s disposition,
                   Of the race of the knife.
                        _Four Ancient Books of Wales_,
                   vol. i. p. 432.

  And in one poem the epithet of _Anghyfiaeth_, that is, speaking a
  language different from the Cymric, is clearly applied to them (_ib_.
  p. 433 and note). Thus in the Triads of Arthur, which are genuine,
  they are included in the three foreign races called ‘Three oppressions
  came into this island, and did not go out of it.’ The second is ‘the
  oppression of the Gwyddyl Ffichti, and they did not again go out of
  it.’ The third was the oppression of the Saxons (_ib_., vol. ii. p.
  465). In order to avoid the force of this, the term Gwyddyl Ffichti is
  usually translated Irish Picts, and supposed to refer to those in
  Ireland only; but the epithet Gwyddyl was certainly used in the larger
  sense of the race wherever found, and it is clear from all the
  passages that the same people are referred to who are known as the
  Picts of Britain. If they had been termed Cymry Ffichti, would this
  school of Welsh antiquarians have tolerated an assertion that they
  were not of the Cymric race?

Footnote 118:

            Angles and Galwydel,
            Let them make their war.—
                _Four Ancient Books of Wales_, vol. i. p. 284.

Footnote 119:

  Nemedius, inter posteros ejus McCailin Moir agus MacLeoid.—MS. 1467.
  See also _Ulster Archæological Journal_, vol. ix. p. 319.

Footnote 120:

  They will be found in Lady Ferguson’s excellent little work, _The
  Story of the Irish before the Conquest_, and in Mr. Standish O’Grady’s
  interesting work just published, _The History of Ireland_, vol. i.
  _Heroic Period_. The interest of this latter work is, in the author’s
  opinion, greatly detracted from by his having unfortunately adopted a
  practice, which cannot be too strongly deprecated, of spelling Irish
  proper names phonetically. There is nothing gained by it, as the form
  of the name has quite as barbarous an appearance as when the proper
  orthography is retained, the identity of the persons meant is lost, it
  is misleading as there is no uniform pronunciation of these names by
  those who speak the vernacular Gaelic, and the travesty of the Irish
  names is equally offensive to good taste and to sound judgment. In
  other respects this little work has great merits.

Footnote 121:

  _Chronicle of the Picts and Scots_, pp. 24, 45, 318, 322.

Footnote 122:

  _Annals of the Four Masters_, vol. i. p. 49.

Footnote 123:

  Genealach Corca Laidhe.—_Miscellany of the Celtic Society_, p. 10.

Footnote 124:

  _Ranta on Athcliath cochele ittir Cond. c. Cathach agus Mogh Nuadhad_
  cui nomen erat Eogan.—_Ad an._ 165.

Footnote 125:

  Bede, _Ec. Hist._, lib. iii. cap. iii.

Footnote 126:

  _Annals of the Four Masters_, vol. i. p. 113.

Footnote 127:

  _Indarba Ullad a h-Erend a Manand la Cormac hui Cond. As de ba Cormac
  Ulfada dia ro cuir Ul. a fadh_.—_Ad an._ 254.

Footnote 128:

  Genealach Corca Laidhe.—_Misc. Celtic Soc._, pp. 4, 5.

Footnote 129:

  _Ib_. p. 67.

Footnote 130:

  _Ibid_. p. 5.

Footnote 131:

  See _Annals of the Four Masters_, under dates, and Keating’s _History
  of Ireland_. Tighernac under 322, 326, 332.

Footnote 132:

  Cormac’s Glossary, edited for the Irish Arch. Society by Mr. Whitley
  Stokes, p. 111.

Footnote 133:

  _Annals of the Four Masters._

Footnote 134:

  _Tribes and Customs of Hy Fiachrach_, p. 19.

Footnote 135:

  From the Book of Leinster. The substance is given in O’Curry’s
  _Lectures on the MS. Materials_, p. 287.

Footnote 136:

  Dean of Lismore’s Book, p. 157.

Footnote 137:

  This poem is preserved in McFirbis’ _Book of Genealogies_, p. 410,
  where the prose tales will also be found. The original of the poem is
  printed in the Appendix No. VI.

Footnote 138:

  McFirbis, in his Genealogical MS., says—‘This account I found among
  the Books of Fardorough McFirbis, who was a sennachaidhe well
  acquainted in Alban and much frequented it.’ He lived about 1560.

Footnote 139:

  Fergus filius Eric ipse fuit primus qui de semine Chonare suscepit
  regnum Alban.—_Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 130.

Footnote 140:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 18.

Footnote 141:

  _Stat. Acc._ (1791-99), vol. xiv. p. 602.

Footnote 142:

  Cath a sreith in terra Circin inter Pictones invicem in quo cecidit
  Bruidhi mac Mailchon.—_Tigh. Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 76.

Footnote 143:

  _Chron. of the Picts and Scots_, pp. 320 and 526.

Footnote 144:

  O’Curry, _MS. Materials of Ancient Irish History_, p. 319. The story
  of the children of Uisneach, from which the quotations are here made,
  will be found in the _Transactions_ of the Gaelic Society of Dublin.

Footnote 145:

  The old Gaelic names of the leading physical features of the Highlands
  have been so perverted by the numerous guide-books to which the
  attraction of the country to tourists has given rise, that the older
  forms well known some thirty years ago are almost gone. The writers of
  these books seem to have invented an orthography of their own, which
  they suppose to represent Gaelic words, but are neither one thing nor
  another. One of their most successful inventions is that of the
  _Cuchullin_ hills in Skye.

Footnote 146:

  A translation from the oldest copy of it will be found in the
  introduction to the Dean of Lismore’s Book, p. lxxxvii.

Footnote 147:

  _Ib_., p. lxxxviii. note.

Footnote 148:

  _Chronicles of the Picts and Scots_, p. 319.

Footnote 149:

  Cormac’s Glossary, edited by Mr. Whitley Stokes, p. 72.

Footnote 150:

  The form of this name as we find it in St. Berchan’s prophecy is
  identical with that of Erin or Ireland.—See _Chron. Picts and Scots_,
  pp. 84, 88, and 98.

Footnote 151:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, p. 165.

Footnote 152:

  Fordun’s _Chronicle_, ed. 1874, vol. i. pp. 227, 430.

Footnote 153:

  There is a charter by Malcolm the Fourth to the canons of Scone, ‘in
  principale sede regni nostri fundata,’ in which he conveys to them the
  titles ‘de quatuor maneriis meis de Gouerin scilicet de Scon, et de
  Cubert et de Fergrund et de Stratherdel.’—_Chr. of Scone_, p. 6.

Footnote 154:

  _Chron. Picts and Scots_, pp. 9 and 21.

Footnote 155:

  _Ancient Laws and Institutes of England_, edited by Benjamin Thorpe,
  1840.

  _Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales_, edited by Aneurin Owen, 1841.

Footnote 156:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. i., vol. ii., vol. iii.

Footnote 157:

  See _Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland_, edited by Cosmo Innes, vol.
  i.

Footnote 158:

  Sir Henry Maine, in his _Early History of Institutions_, considers
  that the unit was the Finé or sept, several of which united to form a
  tribe; but it will be shown that the Tuath or tribe preceded the Finé
  or clan.

Footnote 159:

  See the author’s Introduction to the Dean of Lismore’s Book, pp. xvii.
  and xviii.

Footnote 160:

  The legendary history of Ireland contains traces of the higher
  position of the female.

Footnote 161:

  _The Book of Rights_, printed by the Celtic Society, p. 174.

Footnote 162:

  _Brehon Laws_, vol. iv. p. 341.

Footnote 163:

  The influence of the Church in this respect is recognised in the Welsh
  laws.

Footnote 164:

  This account of the ranks in the tribe is taken from the
  _Crithgabhlach Brehon Laws_, vol. iv. p. 299.

Footnote 165:

  Quoted in Sir H. S. Maine’s _Early History of Institutions_, p. 114.

Footnote 166:

  _Ibid._ vol. ii. p. 345.

Footnote 167:

  _Ibid_. iv. p. 321.

Footnote 168:

  Maine, vol. iv. p. 337.

Footnote 169:

  _Ibid_. iv. p. 331.

Footnote 170:

  _Ibid_. iv. p. 373.

Footnote 171:

  See _Collectanea de Rebus Hibernicis_, vol. i., No. III., and Appendix
  to the _Battle of Maghrath_.

Footnote 172:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iv., _Crithgablach_.

Footnote 173:

  _Tribes and Customs of Hy Many_, p. 13.

Footnote 174:

  _Early History of Institutions_, p. 23.

Footnote 175:

  Cormac’s _Glossary_, voce _Clethac_, p. 29. Mr. O’Curry gives the
  following illustration:—A fine of three Cumals, or twenty-one cows,
  might be paid thus:—

  10 Ri Seoit = 10 cows.
  16 Samaisc = 8 cows.
  12 Seoitgabla = 3 cows.

Footnote 176:

  Published by Celtic Society, p. 107.

Footnote 177:

  _Annals of the Four Masters_, i. p. 53.

Footnote 178:

  _War of the Gaedhil with Gaill_, p. 49.

Footnote 179:

  _Irish Topographical Poems_, p. 9.

Footnote 180:

  _Irish Topographical Poems_, p. 1.

Footnote 181:

  _Miscellany of the Celtic Society_, p. 49.

Footnote 182:

  _Tribes and Customs of Hy Fiachraich_, p. 453.

Footnote 183:

  Mr. O’Donovan explains _Duthaidh_ as a tract of country hereditary in
  some family; _Duthchas_ as a hereditary estate or patrimonial
  inheritance; _Duthchasach_ an inheritor or hereditary
  proprietor.—_Ib_. p. 149.

Footnote 184:

  _Tribes and Customs of Hy Fiachriach_, pp. 149-159.

Footnote 185:

  _Customs of Hy Many_, preface, p. 4.

Footnote 186:

  _Customs of the Hy Many_, Preface, p. 19.

Footnote 187:

  _Chorographical Description of West Connaught_, p. 368. The beekeepers
  were important functionaries, as honey supplied at that time the place
  of sugar.

Footnote 188:

  _Ib_. p. 139.

Footnote 189:

  _Cat. Stowe MSS._ vol. i. p. 168.

Footnote 190:

  Reeves, _Arch. of Down and Connor_, pp. 330, 345.

Footnote 191:

  Letter of Sir John Davis, _Coll. de Rebus Hibernicis_, vol. i. pp.
  140, 152.

Footnote 192:

  Book of Kells, _Irish Arch. Misc._, vol. i. pp. 139, 143.

Footnote 193:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iv. p. 349.

Footnote 194:

  There is an elaborate account of the position of the _Ceile_ in the
  _Ancient Laws_, vol. ii.; but the position of the _Daor Ceile_ is
  shortly and clearly given in Cormac’s _Glossary_, voce _Aicillne_, p.
  13.

Footnote 195:

  _Ancient Laws_, vol. iv. pp. 39, 287.

Footnote 196:

  _Ancient Laws_, vol. iii. p. 11; vol. iv. pp. 39, 43.

Footnote 197:

  _Ib_. vol. iv. p. 321.

Footnote 198:

  _Ancient Laws_, vol. iv. p. 283. The word _Gabail_ has retained its
  technical meaning here in Scotch Gaelic, where it signifies a farm or
  lease, and _Gabbailtaiche_ is a tacksman or superior farmer.

Footnote 199:

  _Ancient Laws_, vol. i. p. 261.

Footnote 200:

  _Ibid_. vol. i. p. 275.

Footnote 201:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iii. pp. 330-35.

Footnote 202:

  _Ibid_. vol. ii. p. 163.

Footnote 203:

  O’Donovan’s Supplement to O’Reilly’s _Irish Dictionary_.

Footnote 204:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. i. p. 183.

Footnote 205:

  _Ib_. p. 259.

Footnote 206:

  _Ib_. p. 273.

Footnote 207:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iv. p. 43.

Footnote 208:

  _Ibid_. p. 286.

Footnote 209:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. ii. p. 269.

Footnote 210:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. ii. pp. 279, 281.

Footnote 211:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. ii. pp. 209, 211.

Footnote 212:

  _Ib_. pp. 223-5.

Footnote 213:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iii. p. 309.

Footnote 214:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iv. pp. 325, 326.

Footnote 215:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iv. pp. 373, 375.

Footnote 216:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. iii. pp. 495, 497.

Footnote 217:

  The word _Lite_ is translated in the Brehon Laws ‘stirabout,’ but this
  is a term unknown out of Ireland, and the Scotch correlative
  ‘porridge’ has been substituted.

Footnote 218:

  _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol. ii. pp. 147-193.

Footnote 219:

  Genealach Corca Laidhe, _Miscellany of the Celtic Society_, pp. 31,
  49.

Footnote 220:

  _Genealogies, Tribes, and Customs of Hy Fiachraich_, pp. 6-11.

Footnote 221:

  _Description of West Connaught_, p. 127.

Footnote 222:

  Reeves’s _Eccles. Antiquities of Down and Connor_, pp. 332, 345.

Footnote 223:

  Reeves’s _Down and Connor_, p. 348.

Footnote 224:

  _Collect. de Reb. Hib._, vol. i. pp. 164, 169.

Footnote 225:

  _Ancient Laws of Wales_, p. 86.

Footnote 226:

  _Ancient Laws of Wales_, pp. 84, 268.

Footnote 227:

  _Ancient Laws of Wales_, 82, 5, 6; 697, 5.

Footnote 228:

  _Ancient Laws of Wales_, pp. 96, 97. It is not quite clear whether the
  length of an _Erw_ is thirty times its breadth, or thirty times the
  long yoke. In the latter case the _Erw_ would contain only 1706 square
  yards, or rather more than the third of an acre.

Footnote 229:

  _Ancient Laws of Wales_, p. 81.

Footnote 230:

  _Ib_., p. 263.

Footnote 231:

  _Ancient Laws of Wales_, p. 375.

Footnote 232:

  _Myvyrian Arch._, vol. iii. p. 298, No. 80.

Footnote 233:

  _Ib_., pp. 88, 96, 573.

Footnote 234:

  _Welsh Laws_, 394, 699.

Footnote 235:

  _Four Ancient Books of Wales_, vol. ii. p. 461.

Footnote 236:

  _Ancient Laws_, p. 266.

Footnote 237:

  _Ancient Laws_, p. 605. The form of the figure has been slightly
  altered, in order to bring it to the same form as that shown in the
  Irish system.

Footnote 238:

  _Ancient Laws_, pp. 198, 199.

Footnote 239:

  _Ancient Laws_, p. 95.

Footnote 240:

  _Ib_., p. 98.

Footnote 241:

  Diodorus Siculus, lib. v. c. 21.

Footnote 242:

  Strabo, lib. iv.

Footnote 243:

  Cæsar, _De Bello Gallico_, v. 12.

Footnote 244:

  Solinus, c. 22.

Footnote 245:

  Xifiline, lib. lxxvi. s. 12-16.

Footnote 246:

  These passages are taken from the edition of the _Amra Choluim
  Chilli_, with a translation by Mr. O’Beirne Crowe.

Footnote 247:

  _Miscellany of the Celtic Society_, p. 61.

Footnote 248:

  The word _Gialla_ means a hostage, and the Irish district is said to
  have been so named because the hostages of the conquered people were
  fettered with golden fetters.

Footnote 249:

  _Chronicles of Picts and Scots_, pp. 308-314. The numbers are given as
  stated in the tract, but seem not quite correct. Thus there is an
  enumeration of the houses of the Cinel Angusa in connection with the
  lands occupied by them, which amount to 330 in place of 430, and the
  armed muster is not in proportion to the size of the tribe as shown by
  the number of houses. It is probable those of the Cinel Gabran and
  Cinel Angusa have been transposed, and that the 500 belongs to the
  former, the 300 to the latter.

Footnote 250:

  _Hist. MSS. Rep._ v., p. 613; Robertson’s _Index_, pp. 39, 57.

Footnote 251:

  ‘Taisius (_Toisech_) apud nos idem est sensu literali ac Capitaneus
  seu precipuus dux.’—O’Flaherty, _Ogygia_.

Footnote 252:

  ‘Thanus apud priscos Scotos sive Hybernos dicitur Tosche.’—_Regiam
  Majestatem_, B. iv. c. 31; note by Sir John Skene.

Footnote 253:

  Domania regis et Thanagia regis idem significant. Ass. reg. Da. c.
  Statuit Dominus, 38.—Skene, _De Verborum Significatione_.

  Si vero in dominicis vel Thanagiis domini regis, etc. Stat. Alex.
  II.—_Acts of Parliament_, i. 399.

Footnote 254:

  _Acts of Parliament_, i. p. 375.

Footnote 255:

  ‘Abstractione sanguinis que dicitur Bludwytys.’—_Chart. of Lennox_, p.
  44. ‘Bludwytys que Scotice dicitur _fuilrath_.’—_Ib_. p. 45.

Footnote 256:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 663.

Footnote 257:

  Thus the son of an _Aire forgall_ was an _Aire ard_.—_Brehon Laws_,
  vol. i. p. 77.

Footnote 258:

  _Brehon Laws_, vol. i. p. 49; Petrie’s _Antiquities of Tarahill_, p.
  199; _Chron. of Picts and Scots_, p. 319.

Footnote 259:

  _Acts of Parl._, vol. i. p. 640.

Footnote 260:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 398.

Footnote 261:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 655.

Footnote 262:

  _Liber de Scon_, p. 24.

Footnote 263:

  _Chart. Dunf._, pp. 6, 17. The two classes are mentioned in a charter
  by Thomas, Earl of Mar, in 1359, of the lands of Rotheneyk, ‘cum
  nativis et fugitivis dictarum terrarum.’—_Ant. Aberd. and Banff_, vol.
  iv. p. 716.

Footnote 264:

  These names seem to be derived from the verb _Cum_, tene, retine; and
  in the one case _forba_ or _orba_, terra, and in the other _lamh_,
  manus, with or without the preposition _ar_, upon. The word _Cum_ is
  no doubt the root of the Irish _Cumal_, the primary meaning of which
  was a female slave.

Footnote 265:

  _Acts of Parl._, vol. i. p. 381.

Footnote 266:

  The word Davach has been supposed to be derived from _Damh_ an ox, and
  _Achadh_ or _Ach_ a field, and thus to mean oxgang; but the Book of
  Deer shows this to be false etymology. The word there in its oldest
  form is _Dabach_, and the last syllable is inflected (forming in gen.
  pl. _acc_, dual _Dabeg_), which it could not be if it meant _Ach_ a
  field. The word is also applied in Ireland to the largest liquid
  measure, and appears in this sense in the old Irish Glosses, ‘Caba,
  _i.e_. Cavea, _Dabhach_, genitive _Dabhca_’ (p. 63).

Footnote 267:

  Dasent’s _Saga of Burnt Njal_.

Footnote 268:

  _Chart. of Lennox_, pp. 34, 36, 38. Mr. W. Fraser, in his first report
  on the Montrose papers, notes a charter by Alexander of Dunhon to Sir
  Patrick of Graham of three quarters of a carucate of land of Akeacloy
  nether, _which in Scotch is called Arachor_ (_Hist. MSS. Rep. I._
  166); but in his second report quotes two charters by the Earl of
  Lennox confirming to Sir David of Graham the half-carucate of land of
  Strathblahane, where the church called Arathor in the one charter and
  Letharathor in the other was built, but these charters have obviously
  been misread. It was not the church but the land conveyed that was
  called _Arathor_ or _Letharathor_, that is, carucate or half-carucate
  (_ib_. iv. 386).

Footnote 269:

  _Antiq. Aberdeen and Banff_, vol. iv. p. 690, where a dimidia
  carucata, or half-ploughgate, is said to contain ‘quater xx acras cum
  crofto habiente vii acras et communi pastura.’ In the Chartulary of
  Arbroath we have ‘una carrucata terræ mensurata et arabilis cum
  commune pastura,’ p. 7.

Footnote 270:

  _Charters of Holyrood_, p. 44.

Footnote 271:

  _Chart. of St. Andrews_, p. 114.

Footnote 272:

  ‘The tenants, particularly of arable farms, have but small
  possessions, only the fourth part of a farm, or what is called here a
  Horsegang’ (_Stat. Acc. of Kilmartin_, viii. 97). In the Craignish
  papers it is termed a quarter or Horsegang, and an eight shilling and
  eight-penny land.

Footnote 273:

  _Scotch Legal Antiquities_, by Cosmo Innes, p. 270. Mr. Innes was the
  first to discover this important analogy.

Footnote 274:

  _Origines Parochiales_, vol. ii. part i. pp. 177, 191. Appendix III.

Footnote 275:

  Information derived from the late Colonel Macdonell of Glengarry, who
  had an accurate knowledge of Highland traditions. In the _Stat. Acc._
  of Saddel it is stated that the average stock of a merk land is 4
  horses, 12 milch cows with their followers, and 40 sheep with theirs
  (vol. xii. p. 477).

Footnote 276:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, lib. xiv. No. 389.

Footnote 277:

  _Chart. of St. Andrews_, p. 45.

Footnote 278:

  _Chartulary of Dunfermline._

Footnote 279:

  _Antiquities of Aberdeen and Banff_, vol. ii. p. 273.

Footnote 280:

  _Chartulary of Moray_, p. 8.

Footnote 281:

  _Ib._ p. 83.

Footnote 282:

  _Antiq. of Aberdeen and Banff_, vol. ii. pp. 17, 22.

Footnote 283:

  _Antiquities of Aberdeen and Banff_, vol. i. p. 174.

Footnote 284:

  _Chartulary of St. Andrews_, p. 238.

Footnote 285:

  _Chartulary of Arbroath_, pp. 12, 35.

Footnote 286:

  _Chartulary of Glasgow_, p. 12.

Footnote 287:

  _Chartulary of Holyrood_, p. 61.

Footnote 288:

  _Acts of Parl._, vol. i. p. 378.

Footnote 289:

  _Chart. of Moray_, pp. 23, 76, 80.

Footnote 290:

  Craig arrives at the true meaning when he says, ‘Meo quidem judicio
  melius a _canone_ deducetur, cum idem prope significet. _Canon_ enim
  in jure præstationem annuam sive pensitationem innuit, unde canon
  frumentarius et canon metallicus.... Est itaque _Cana_ idem quod
  _Canica_, sive _Canon_, sive certa præstatio annua, quæ nunquam
  naturam feudi per se, neque speciem tenendriæ immutat, ut nulla alia
  præstatio annua, nisi exprimatur tenenda in feudifirma.’—_Jus
  feudale_, pp. 79, 28.

Footnote 291:

  _Liber Ecclesie de Scon_, p. 7.

Footnote 292:

  _Chamberlain Rolls_, pp. 6, 50. There is a blank in the record.

Footnote 293:

  Appendix III., Athole Papers. _Collect. de Rebus Albanicis_, p. 16.

Footnote 294:

  Innes’s _Legal Antiquities_, p. 70; Ware’s _Antiquitates Hibernicæ_,
  p. 209; O’Curry, _Lectures on the Manners and Customs of the Ancient
  Irish_, vol. iii. p. 495, note; _Ulster Archæol. Journal_, vol. iv. p.
  241. Mr. Innes’s attempt to explain these terms will show how
  essential an acquaintance with the ancient Irish laws is to the
  interpretation of our ancient Scotch customs.

Footnote 295:

  _Chart. of St. Andrews_, p. 277.

Footnote 296:

  Faciendo forinsecum servitium tantum quod pertinet ad quinque davachas
  terræ, servitium vero pertinens ad sextam davacham de Blar dictis
  canonicis remisimus.—_Liber Ecclesie de Scon_, p. 42.

Footnote 297:

  Aliquod servitium nisi forinsecum servitium Scoticanum domini
  regis.—_Chart. of Moray_, p. 470.

Footnote 298:

  Faciendo forinsecum servitium in exercitu quod pertinet ad predictas
  terras.—_Chart. of Arb._, p. 74.

Footnote 299:

  Stubbs’s _Select Charters_, pp. 284, 293.

Footnote 300:

  This more detailed explanation seems necessary, as the term is often
  used loosely, as if the feu-farm holding was a mere tenancy. See the
  author’s edition of Fordun, vol. ii. p. 415, for a fuller discussion
  of this.

Footnote 301:

  The seven earls appear, according to Fordun, at the coronation of King
  Alexander the Second, and in the same year he passes some laws,
  apparently with consent of these earls, regarding the land. In the
  first the expression is, ‘Rex cum communi consilio comitum suorum.’ In
  the second, ‘Rex et _principes_ ejus.’ By Fordun they are usually
  called _magnates et proceres_.

Footnote 302:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 377. Two popular errors have
  prevailed with regard to the true character and position of the
  thanes. By the oldest of these they were regarded as the governors of
  provinces, having over them an _abthane_ or chief governor. Fordun
  seems the inventor of this, and to it belongs his mythic character
  Macduff, thane of Fife; but it is inconsistent with the account he
  subsequently gives of the tenure of the crown lands, and although it
  has received the sanction of Mr. Hill Burton, it has been justly
  discarded by such historians as George Chalmers, Joseph Robertson,
  Cosmo Innes, and John Stuart. The later theory, that the thanes were
  something entirely different from the English thane, and were merely
  crown officers or stewards appointed to levy the crown dues, has
  unfortunately received the powerful sanction of these writers, but the
  author has never been able to accept the theory. It appears to him a
  partial and incomplete view, and inconsistent with the facts recorded
  regarding them. Sir John Skene states his position correctly when he
  says, ‘Thanus was ane freeholder holding his lands of the king.’—_De
  Verborum Sig._, sub voce. The reader is referred to the author’s
  edition of Fordun, vol. ii. p. 414, for a discussion on this point.

Footnote 303:

  ‘Milites, _Leg. Malc. Mab._, c. 2, and generalie in the auld lawes of
  this realme, are called freehalders, haldand their landes of barons in
  chief.’—Skene, _De Verborum Sig._, sub voce.

Footnote 304:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. pp. 375, 377, 380, 382.

Footnote 305:

  _Ib_. vol. i. pp. 400, 403.

Footnote 306:

  _Ib_. p. 652.

Footnote 307:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, s. 492, iii. 112, iv. 116. The same loose
  notions have prevailed of the position of the _libere tenentes_ as of
  the thanes, and therefore it has been necessary to treat of both
  somewhat at length. _Libere tenentes_ are usually translated ‘free
  tenants,’ just as _tenant du Roi_, in Ragman Roll, is usually
  translated ‘king’s tenant,’ as if they were tenants in the modern
  sense of the term, from the unfortunate propensity to render a word in
  one language by its phonetic equivalent in another, though the meaning
  may be different; but the true rendering of the one is ‘freeholders,’
  and of the other, ‘holding of the king _in capite_.’ Ware defines the
  _libere tenentes_ in Ireland as those _qui prædia habebunt, ad hæredes
  transmittenda_ (_Ant. Hib._, 209); and Craig gives a very clear
  account of these in Scotland (_Jus feudale_, 87. 6; 248. 28; 362. 42).
  According to Cowell, ‘Freehold frank tenement, _liberum tenementum_,
  is that land or tenement which a man holdeth in fee, feetail, or at
  least for term of life.’ Freeholders in the ancient law of Scotland
  were called _milites_; and tenement or tenementum, he says,
  ‘signifies, most properly, a house or homestall, but more largely
  either for a house or land that a man holdeth of another, and joined
  with the adjective Frank, it contains lands, houses, and offices,
  wherein we have estate for term of life or in fee.’

Footnote 308:

  Ochiern, ‘Ogitharius,’ is ane name of dignitie and of ane
  freehalder.—Skene, _De Verborum Sig._

Footnote 309:

  See Erskine’s _Institutes_, vol. i. p. 370, for a good account of the
  rentallers or kindlie tenants.

Footnote 310:

  _Chart. of Arbroath_, pp. 44, 88. The word _terra_, here translated
  land, means usually arable land only. Treiglas is probably
  _Traighghlais_ or sea-shore, from Traigh, strand; and Glas, an old
  word for the sea.

Footnote 311:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 397.

Footnote 312:

  Quod rex debet habere forisfactum _comitum si thani eorum_ remanserunt
  ab exercitu, etc.—_Acts of Parliament_, vol. vi. p. 398.




                              CHAPTER VII.

                   THE THANAGES AND THEIR EXTINCTION.


[Sidenote: Review of the Thanages and their conversion into Baronies.]

Such being the process by which the ancient tribe in the eastern
districts passed into the thanage, the events which followed the death
of Alexander the Third produced a change which entirely altered this
position, so that the thanage in its original form may be said to have
ceased with the dynasty of kings of which he was the last. The war with
England which followed, the conflict between two families of Norman
descent for the succession to the crown, the numerous confiscations of
their respective partisans which accompanied it and led to their
possessions falling to the Crown and the final establishment of a Norman
dynasty of kings, naturally created a great revolution in the
land-tenure of Scotland; the extension of the feudal holding of ward and
relief became the established policy of the Crown, and the ancient
Celtic tenures gradually gave way before the advancing feudalism, and
eventually disappeared under its influence.

After the wars of independence and succession we find most of the
thanages had reverted to the Crown, and they were usually re-granted to
Norman barons on a feudal tenure for military service. This will be
illustrated by three charters of David the Second, all granted in the
same year. By the first he infefts his cousin, Walter de Lesly, knight,
heritably in the thanage of Aberkerdor and its pertinents in the county
of Banff, and in the thanages of Kyncardyn; and then follows this
instructive clause:—‘Yet because perchance the heirs of the thanes who
anciently held these thanages in feu-farm might recover these thanages
to be held in future as their predecessors held them, we grant to our
said cousin, that if these heirs, or any of them, recover these
thanages, or any of them, our said cousin and his heirs shall hold and
possess the services of the heirs or heir of the said thanes or thane,
and the feu-duties or feu-duty anciently due from the thanages or
thanage.’ This clause seems to have interposed no obstacle to the feudal
tenure of the thanages being completed, for it is followed by two
charters to Walter de Lesly,—one of the fee of the thanages of
Kyncardin, Aberluthnot, and Fettercairn, with their bondmen, bondages,
and followers, and erecting the same into a feudal barony, with the
usual jurisdiction, and under the obligation of rendering military
service; and another of the thanage of Aberkerdor, likewise erected into
a barony in similar terms.[313]

A review of the thanages still existing at this time, with such
information as the records afford us, will complete this view of their
position.

[Sidenote: Thanages in Moray and Ross.]

Beginning with the north, we find in the great province of Moray and
Ross but one thanage situated north of the Moray Firth, that of
Dingwall; but we have merely a mention of its name in 1382 and 1383,
when Euphame, lady of Ross, resigned the thanage and castle of Dingwall
in the hands of the king for a re-grant.[314] Of the mythic thanage of
Crumbachtyn or Cromarty, with which Wynton invests the usurper Macbeth,
we find no trace whatever. Proceeding to the southern shores of the
Moray Firth, we find a belt of thanages extending from the river Nairn
to the Spey. Between the river Nairn and the burn of Lethen, which falls
into the Findhorn near its junction with the sea, lay the four thanages
of Dyke, Brodie, Moyness, and Cawdor. In a charter by Alexander the
Second to the bishop of Moray, in the twenty-fourth year of his reign
(1238), he grants twenty-four marks of the feu-duty (_feodofirma_) of
Moythus or Moyness and sixteen marks of the feu-duty of Dike and
Brothyn, by the hands of his _feodifirmarii_ of these lands.[315] In an
Extent of the lands of Kylravoc and Estir Gedeys in 1295, William, thane
of Moythes, and Donald, thane of Kaledor or Caldor, are among the
jurors; and in 1311 Michael, son of Malcolm, thane of Dyke and Brodie,
is mentioned; but it is only with regard to the thanedom of Caldor that
we have any information beyond the mere mention of the name. There is
preserved at Caldor an original charter by Robert the First to William,
thane of Caldor, in which he grants to him in feu-farm (_ad
feodofirmam_) the whole thanage of Caldor, with its pertinents, for an
annual payment of twelve marks, as was wont to be paid in the time of
Alexander, king of Scotland, our predecessor last deceased, to be held
by him and his heirs of us and our heirs heritably in feu-farm,
rendering to us the service due and wont to be rendered in the time of
King Alexander.[316] This charter refers back to the time before the war
of independence, when the thanage-tenure was still preserved intact. The
thanage appears afterwards to have been held of the earls of Ross, but
in the forfeiture of the earl of Ross in 1475 it fell once more to the
Crown, and is confirmed by King James the Second to William, thane of
Caldor; and his whole lands are erected of new into a thanage, with the
privileges of a barony, and the feudal holding by ward and relief is
combined with the customary annual payment,—thus retaining the name of a
thanage while the character of the tenure is altered.[317] Among the
lands incorporated in the new thanage were lands in the parish of
Urquhart in the Black Isle, detached from the old thanage, and they
afford a curious instance of the retention of the old Celtic name by a
Gaelic-speaking population, for these lands became known by the term of
_Fearintosh_ or the _Toishach’s_ land. Between the Lethen Burn and the
Lossie lay the extensive thanage of Moravia or Moray, of which the
forest of Darnaway appears to have formed a part.[318] We find this
thanage mentioned in the Records, but have no particulars of its
history; but it is no doubt from it that the family of De Moravia took
its name, the earliest possession of this family having been Duffus,
which, if not a part of it, was at least adjacent to the thanage.

On both sides of the Lossie lay the thanage of Kilmalemnok, the greater
part of which forms the parish of St. Andrews; and a charter by
Archibald, Earl of Douglas, to James Douglas of Balvany, confirmed by
King James the First, includes ‘all his lands lying in the thaynedomes
in the lordship of Kilmalaman.’[319] The only other thanage in this
province of which any mention is preserved was that situated in the
interior of the country, as in 1367 Joannes de Dolais was thane of
Cromdale, a district on the river Spey, at some distance from its
mouth.[320] Besides the mention of these thanages, which are mainly to
be found in the more level districts adjacent to the sea, we are not
without indications that the different classes which, according to
Fordun, were connected with the thanages, likewise existed in the
interior districts of this province. Thus in an agreement between the
bishop of Moray and Walter Cumyn, between A.D. 1224 and 1233, regarding
lands in Badenoch, it is provided with regard to the native-men
(_nativi_), that the bishop shall have all the cleric and two lay
native-men—viz. Gyllemaluock Macnakeeigelle and Sythad mac Mallon, with
all their chattels and possessions, and with their children and all
their posterity, and the chattels of their children; and Walter Cumyn to
have all the other lay native-men of lands in Badenoch; and when, after
the war of independence, Robert the Bruce erected the whole lands
extending from the Spey to the Western Sea into an earldom of Moray in
favour of his nephew Thomas Randolph, the earldom was granted, with all
its manors, burgh townships, and thanages, and all the royal demesnes,
rents, and duties, and all barons and freeholders (_libere tenentes_) of
the said earldom, who hold of the Crown _in capite_, and their heirs
were to render their homages, fealties, attendance at courts, and all
other services, to Thomas Randolph and his heirs, and to hold their
baronies and tenements of him and his heirs, reserving to the barons and
freeholders the rights and liberties of their own courts according to
use and wont; and Thomas Randolph was to render to the king the Scottish
service and aid due as heretofore for each davach of land.[321]

[Sidenote: Thanages in Mar and Buchan.]

Crossing the Spey and entering the province of Mar and Buchan, a rental
of the crown lands in the reign of Alexander Third furnishes us with the
names of ten thanages, with their yearly values. These are Aberdeen,
Kyntor, Fermartyn, Obyne, Glendowachy, Aberkirdor, Conuath, Bugh,
Munbre, Natherdale.[322] Of these thanages we find a line extending from
the shore of the Moray Firth to the eastern sea at Aberdeen, and
separating the eastern portion of Buchan from the inland districts on
the west. The first of these thanages extends along the shore from
Cullen to Banff, and includes the parishes of Boyndie, Fordyce,
Deskford, and Ordiquhill, forming the greater part of the district of
Boyne, which, with that of Enzie, makes up the modern county of Banff.
It consisted of two parts,—the thanage of Boyne properly so called,
containing the parish of Boyndie and parts of Fordyce and Banff, and the
forest of Boyne adjoining it in the south. Of the early history of this
thanage we have no information, till we find it converted into a feudal
barony by King David II., who grants a charter in 1368 to John de
Edmounstone of his whole lands of his thanage of Boyne, with an annual
rent of four pounds from the town of Banff, to be held as a barony, with
the tenandries and services and homages of the freeholders
(_liberetenentium_). The forest of Boyne appears to have remained in the
Crown.[323]

East of this thanage was that of Glendowachy, also called Doune, which,
in the Rental of Alexander the Third is valued at twenty pounds yearly.
It appears to have been granted by Robert the First to Hugh, earl of
Ross, but in 1382 Robert the Second grants to John Lyounn, knight, the
whole lands of the thanage of Glendowachy, which had fallen to him by
escheat from the late William, earl of Ross, who had alienated it
without the royal consent—to be held by him for the accustomed services.
Adjacent was the small thanage of Munbre, valued in the Rental at
thirty-four pounds eight shillings and eightpence.[324]

South of these thanages lay those of Aberkerdor and Natherdale,
co-extensive with the parish of Marnoch, and that of Conveth, with the
parish of Inverkeithnie. Of these thanages we have some information
prior to the war of independence. Between 1286 and 1289, Simon, thane of
Aberkerdor, founds the chapel of Saint Menimius on the banks of the
Dovern, and grants certain lands to it; and in an inquisition regarding
this foundation in 1369, it is found that Simon was thane of the two
thanages of Conveth and Aberkerdor, and owing to derelict against the
king he had seized both thanages, on which Simon made over six davachs
of Conveth to the earl of Buchan, in order that he might recover the
other thanage of Aberkerdor, and founded the chapel in consequence. He
appears to have had an only daughter and heiress, and the thanage of
Aberkerdor is found in the Crown in the reign of David II., who includes
it in the grant to Walter de Leslie formerly noticed,[325] in whose
favour it was erected into a barony.

From the thanage of Conveth, co-extensive with the parish of
Inverkeithnie, to the eastern seaboard between the Ythan and the Don,
lay the extensive thanage of Fermartyn, the principal seat of which was
Fyvie. Its annual value in the reign of Alexander the Third was 120
marks, and it appears to have been farmed by a tenant, as _Reginald
Firmarius de Fermartyn_ accounts in the Chamberlain Rolls of that reign
for its _firma_ or rent.[326] It consisted, like other large thanages,
of thanage and forest, and among the missing charters of Robert the
First is one to Sir John Broun of the thanage of Fermartyn, and another
to Patrick de Monteath of the office of forestership of Killanell and
Fermartyn, showing that the forest had become a royal forest; David the
Second, however, grants one-half of his thanage of Fermartyn to William,
earl of Sutherland, for his life, with its tenandries and services of
the freeholders (_liberetenencium_), and with its bondmen, and their
bondage services, native-men and their followers, to be held in free
barony, and his heirs to hold it in ward and relief. The other half of
the thanage was held, as appears by the Chamberlain Rolls, by Thomas
Isaak, but it appears to have again fallen to the Crown, and is finally
granted by King Robert the Third as a barony to Henry de Prestoune, with
the town and castle of Fyvie.[327] Adjacent to Fermartyn on the
sea-coast was the smaller thanage of Belhelvie. We know nothing of its
history as a thanage prior to the war of independence, but in 1323
Robert the Bruce confirms to Hugo de Barclay for his homage and service
the lordship of the thanage of Belhelvie, with the lands of Westerton,
Keer, and Egie, within the said thanage, with the office of sergand, and
the _Can_ of the church land of Belhelvie, extending to forty-pound land
and rent, to be held as a free barony, rendering the Scottish service
pertaining to a forty-pound land, and the lands to return to the king on
failure of heirs of the body.[328]

Between the rivers Dee and Don, which formed the old earldom of Mar,
were five thanages. The old town of Aberdeen, on the south bank of the
Don, near its junction with the sea, appears as a thanage in the reign
of Alexander the Third. It is included as such in the Rental of the
crown lands with the annual value of fifty merks, and in the Chamberlain
Rolls for 1264 the sheriff accounts for twelve pounds received from the
thane of Aberdeen; while in 1358 one-half of the thanage of Aberdeen
appears in the Crown, and the other half in the hands of John Herys by
concession of the king.[329] One of the missing charters of the reign of
Robert the First is one to the burgh of Aberdeen of the forest of
Stocket, which was no doubt the forest of the thanage. It merges after
this time in the town and town lands of Aberdeen.

One of the most important and instructive thanages between Don and Dee
was that of Kyntor, now Kintore. It appears in the Rental of the crown
lands in the reign of Alexander the Third, with the annual value of 101
merks, and in the Chamberlain Rolls of 1264 the sheriff receives £17 :
13 : 4 from the thane of Kintor. This thanage was of considerable
extent, and, with the exception of a small part on the north side of the
Don, extends along that river on its south side for about ten miles, and
approaches on the south-east to within a mile of the river Dee. In that
part of the thanage which is separated from the rest by the river Don is
the church of Kinkell, a name which signifies the chief _Cill_ or
church. This church had several chapels dependent upon it. Five of these
were the chapels of Kintore, Kemnay, Kinnellar, Skene, and Dyce, all now
erected into separate parishes, and this gives us the extent of the
ancient thanage. Part of the old parish of Kinkell lay on the south side
of the river Don, and this part formed the lands of Thaneston, or the
Thane’s town. South of it lay the forest of Kintore, with the ancient
keep of Hallforest. The name of the thanage, Kintore, contains the same
prefix of _Kin_ or _Ceann_, signifying chief, and the latter part of the
word is probably _Torr_, a mound or castle. These two names of Kinkell
and Kintore—the one the name of the principal church, the other that of
the thanage, or tribe territory which surrounded it—illustrate a passage
in the Book of Deer, where we find mention of the burdens that fall ‘on
the chief tribe residences of Scotland generally and on the chief
churches’ (_Ardmandaidib_, _Ardchellaib_). The charters which follow the
war of independence show very clearly the different classes by whom the
thanage was occupied. In 1324 Robert the First confirms to Robert de
Keith all the lands and tenements he held of the Crown _in capite_, and
these include the forest of Kintore;[330] but in the following reign it
appears to have been in the Crown, as David II. dates several of his
charters from his manor of the forest of Kyntor;[331] but in 1407
Robert, duke of Albany, confirms a charter by William de Keith to his
son Robert de Keith of the lands and barony of Aldene, and of the forest
of Kyntor, with the freeholders (_liberetenentibus_) of said lands and
their services.[332] The thanage itself forms the subject of other
grants. In 1375 Robert the Second grants to John de Dunbarre, earl of
Moray, all and whole our lands of the thanage of Kyntor, reserving,
however, the tenandries, freeholders (_liberetenentibus_), lands of the
freeholders, and the _Cans_, due to us from the said thanage, to be held
as a barony, with the bondmen, bond services, native-men and their
followers, for military service. This is followed by another charter in
1383, in which the lands of the thanage of Kyntor are granted, along
with the tenandries, freeholders, and lands of the freeholders, and
_Cans_ due from the thanage reserved in the previous charter, but still
reserving the tenandry of Thaynston. This tenandry appears, however, to
have passed likewise to the earl of Moray, and to have been held under
him by a family of the name of Gothynnis, and to have fallen to
co-heirs, for in 1450 Katerina de Gothynnis sells to Thomas Wardrop the
fourth part of the lands of Thaneston, in the thanage of Kyntor, and the
fourth part of the annual rent of Kynkell. In 1465 James III. confirms
to Thomas Wardrope of Gottinys the lands of Thaneston, with the annual
rent of ten shillings from the lands of Kynkell; and in 1467 Alexander
Wardrope sells the lands of Thaneston, and the annual rent of thirty
shillings from the lands of Kynkell, along with the township of
Foulartoun, adjacent to said lands of Thaneston, in the thanage of
Kyntor, and all _Cans_ of oats and cheese, and all money in name of
_Ferchane_ due to him and his heirs from the lands of Kynkell and Dyse,
within the said thanedom, rendering to our lord the king the usual and
customary services.[333] The word here used of _Ferchane_ is the Gaelic
equivalent of _manred_ or _manrent_, the homage and service due by a
bondman, which was by this time very generally commuted to a money
payment, as we see from a rental of the bishopric of Aberdeen, dated in
1511, where the rent of each holding paid in kind concludes with a sum
of money amounting to 3s. 4d. for each two ploughgates, _pro bondagio_,
in lieu of the services of the bondmen.[334]

On Deeside, at some distance from its mouth, were three thanages—those
of O’Neill, Birse, and Aboyne. The thanage of O’Neill is merely
mentioned in a list of the second tithes due to the bishop of Aberdeen,
who drew tithe from it, but as it is not contained in the rental of the
crown lands in the reign of Alexander the Third, and the lands of
O’Neill had fallen in that reign to the great nobleman Alan Durward, in
part of a succession derived from the earls of Mar, it is probable that
was a thanage held of these earls. The thanage of Birse lies on the
south side of the river Dee, and is separated from O’Neill by that
river, and of this thanage we have a very early notice, for King William
the Lion in 1170 grants to the bishop of Aberdeen his whole lands of
Brass, now Birse, consisting of sixteen townships under the kirkton or
church land, and likewise the royal forest of Brass, with all the
native-men of these lands, the thanes, however, being excepted. This
exception is somewhat similar to the grant of the thanage of Kyntor with
the exception of Thaneston, and as Thaneston was eventually conveyed by
the Crown, so by a subsequent charter in 1241 Alexander the Second
confers upon the bishops the right to hold the whole lands of Birse in
free forest without excepting the thane’s land, and thus terminated the
thanage.[335] Farther up the Dee was the thanage of Obeyn, now Aboyne,
from which likewise the bishop draws second tithes. In 1328 we find this
thanage mentioned in the Exchequer Rolls as being then in the hands of
Sir Alexander Fraser heritably. The _firma_ or rent of this thanage,
amounting to £100, belonged in 1348 to the queen.[336]

[Sidenote: Thanages in Angus and Mearns.]

Separated in part by the river Dee and in part by the great chain of the
Mounth, and extending south as far as the Firth of Tay, lay the great
province of Angus and Mearns. The latter earldom, which was much the
smaller of the two, seems from an early period to have fallen to the
Crown, and upwards of two-thirds of its territory was composed of
thanages. These form two groups. The first extended from the river Dee
to the Eastern Sea at Stonehaven, cutting off the north-east corner of
the earldom, and consisted of the two thanages of Durris and Colly or
Cowie. Both thanages were in the Crown as early as 1264, when we find
the sheriff of Kincardine charging the expense of repairing the houses
of Collyes and Durris, and both possessed forests which had become royal
forests, for we find John, earl of Buchan, _custos_ or keeper of these
forests in 1292.[337] The earl of Buchan was forfeited in 1305, and
twenty years after, in 1328, King Robert the First grants to Sir
Alexander Fraser and his son John, the king’s nephew, the forest of
Cragy, in the thanage of Cowie, afterwards called the forest of Cowie,
and in the same year there is the note of a missing charter to Sir
Alexander Fraser of the thanage of Cowie.[338] There is also a notice of
a missing charter of King David the Second to William Fraser and
Margaret Murray his spouse of the thanage of Durris and thanage of
Collie, which thanage of Collie was Alexander Fraser his father’s, with
the lands of Eskyltul, in Kincardine. In 1359 we find the bishop of St.
Andrews accused of having unjustly obtained the _Cans_ of the kirkton of
Durris, but the sheriff, William de Keth, charges himself with the
_firma_ of the thanages of Colly and Durris, but not the forest of
Colly, which is said to be in his hands by concession of the king.[339]
In 1369 King David II. grants to Alexander Fraser the lands of the
thanage of Durris, which is erected into a barony,[340] and the thanage
of Cowie shared the same fate, as, though no charter is extant,
Alexander Fraser, lord of the baronies of Colly and of Durris, grants in
1400 a charter in favour of his son of certain lands in the barony of
Durris, which is confirmed by the king.[341] Robert de Keith, son of
William de Keith and Margaret Fraser, gets a charter from Robert II. of
‘the forest of Colly, the forest called the forest of the Month, the
lands of Ferachy, Glastolach, Cragy, Clochnahull, whilk of old was of
the thanage of Colly and vicecom. Kincardin.’[342]

The other group of thanages forms the southern part of Mearns, and
extends from the Grampians to the sea. The most westerly are those
styled the thanages of Kyncarden, and consist of those of Kyncarden,
Fettercairn, and Aberbuthnot. These three thanages, with the park of
Kyncardyn, the castle and the _Cans_ of the same, appear in 1359 as in
the hands of the Earl of Sutherland by royal concession.[343] Kincardine
was from an early period a royal seat, and Robert the First confirms to
Alexander Fraser six arable acres in the tenement of Auchincarie
adjoining the royal manor of Kincardine. It embraces the greater part of
the parish of Fordun, and as we find in it the name of Kinkell, there
may probably have been a chief church corresponding to the name of
Kincardine, as the same term of Kinkell did to Kintore. The thanage of
Fettercairn is co-extensive with the parish of that name, and contained
in it lands called the Thanestone, that of Aberluthnot with the parish
of Marykirk. How these three thanages became converted into feudal
baronies has already been noticed. On the west side of Fettercairn was
the small thanage of Newdosk, which once formed a parish, now united to
Edzell. Among the notices of missing charters is one by David II. to
Ronald Chene of the thayndom of Newdoskis, and in 1365 he grants to Sir
Alexander de Lyndesay all his lands in the thanage of Newdosk, to be
held as a free barony.[344]

On the west side of Kincardine was the important thanage of Aberbuthnot,
now Arbuthnot. It contained twenty-three townships, beside the kirkton
or church land of Arbuthnot. This thanage appears originally to have
been co-extensive with the parish of Arbuthnot, and to have been broken
up by King William the Lion, who grants the lands of Altrethis, now
Allardyce, to the ancestor of that family, and the thanage itself to
Osbert Olifard the crusader, while the lands of Kair, consisting of four
townships, and those of Inchbreck, appear as separate possessions. The
entire parish appears to have contained fifty-four ploughgates of land,
giving an average of two ploughgates or a half davach to each township;
but in the eighteenth century the separate possessions consisted of
fourteen farms of two ploughgates each, twenty-two of one ploughgate,
five of half a ploughgate, and six of a quarter ploughgate or
husbandland.[345] This is probably a fair enough picture of how the land
had been occupied in older days by the different classes of its
possessors, and if the ploughgate in the main represents the Welsh
_Tref_ the entire thanage in its oldest state was the equivalent of the
Welsh _Cymwd_.

A curious insight into the ancient state of this thanage is given us by
a document, the original of which is preserved at Arbuthnot House. It is
a decreet of the Synod of Perth in a cause betwixt William, bishop of
St. Andrews, and Duncan de Aberbuthenot, in the year 1202. The church of
Arbuthnot was in the diocese of St. Andrews, and the question related to
the respective rights of the bishops of St. Andrews and of the
Arbuthnots, who represented the old thanes, in the kirkton or church
lands of Arbuthnot, and it preserves the evidence of the witnesses who
were examined. The inquiry extends over a period of more than half a
century, and during the episcopate of four bishops. During the
episcopate of Richard, who became bishop in 1163, Osbertus Olifard
appears as lord of the land, and the kirkton is occupied by a multitude
of _Scolocs_. Then in the time of Bishop Hugo his successor Osbertus
Olifard goes on a crusade, and lets the land to Ysaac de Bonevin for six
years, who is termed _firmarius_, and the kirkton was then occupied by
eight holders called _personæ_, having under them people having houses
and pasturing beasts. Then, in the time of Bishop Roger, Walter Olifard,
the next lord, gave his land of Arbuthnot to Hugo Swintun for his
service, and his son Duncan was called De Aberbuthnot, removed the
_Scolocs_, also called the native-men, from the kirkton, and first
cultivated their land, that is, added it to his own demesne. These
lords, from Osbert Olifard to Duncan of Aberbuthnot, evidently
represented the old thanes, as it is said that no thane before Duncan
had ever cultivated this land, nor that any thane had put a plough in
that land before Duncan did so. Osbert Olifard, however, was, from his
name, a Norman intruder, who had obtained it from the Crown after the
thanages became crown land, and it seems to have passed in this way
through many hands, as one witness had seen thirteen thanes possessing
the land, but none of whom had vexed the men of the kirkton before
Duncan. The result of the inquiry was that the bishop was entitled to
_Conveth_ from the men of the kirkton, and to a rent of two cows, and
one-half of the _blodwits_ and _mercets_, but the thane received the
_Can_ and ten cheeses from each house in the kirkton, three men for
harvest from each house, and men for the _Expeditio_ or _Feacht_.[346]
This Duncan de Aberbuthnot was the ancestor of the noble family of
Arbuthnot, who afterwards held the thanage as a barony.

Next to Aberbuthnot was the small thanage of Morphie. It is mentioned in
1362 in the Exchequer Rolls, and among the missing charters by David II.
are two of annual rents furth of the thanage of Morphie.[347] It is
situated in the parish of St. Cyrus, formerly called Ecclesgreig, and
here we come in contact with another designation of land which we
noticed in a previous volume, viz., that of the _Abbacia_ or
_Abthanrie_.[348] This was land which had formerly belonged to an abbey
or monastery of the Columban Church, but had fallen to the Crown either
by the monastery falling into the hands of lay abbots or by its
extinction, and when they became crown lands we find them classed with
the thanages. These _Abthanries_ are in the main confined to the country
lying between the great mountain chain of the Mounth and the Firth of
Forth; and the first we meet with is that of Ecclesgreig, which was
granted by King William the Lion to the priory of St. Andrews. By his
charter the king conveys the church of Ecclesgreig, with the chapel of
St. Regulus, and with the half carucate or ploughland in which it is
situated, and with the land of the _abbacia_ of Ecclesgreig, according
to its ancient rights, and with its common pasture, canons, and men, and
with my thane and my men throughout the whole parish of Ecclesgreig. The
thane here mentioned seems to have been the thane of Morphie, as that
thanage was within the parish, the rest of the land forming the
_abbacia_ or _abthanrie_; and the thanage appears to have passed into
the hands of David, earl of Huntingdon, as King Alexander the Second
confirms the above grant with the exception of his thane and his men,
and Earl David grants to the priory of St. Andrews ‘the whole _Can_ and
_Conveth_ which the canons were due to him for the land of Ecclesgreig,
and the services which their men were bound to render to him, which is
confirmed by Earl John, his son.’[349]

When we enter the earldom of Angus, which forms the southern and larger
part of this province, we find that the thanages lie more apart, and
bear a less proportion in extent to the whole land of the earldom. This
arises from its greater importance, from its situation, its size, and
the character of the land as a part of the territory in the heart of the
kingdom, and the greater extent to which the land had been granted to
foreign barons as feudal holdings. The oldest mention of the thanages in
this earldom is in connection with the grants to the very ancient church
of Restennot, near Forfar. A charter by David the Second in 1344
narrates that the kings Malcolm (Ceannmor), Alexander (the First), and
David (the First), had granted to the prior and canons of Restennot,
besides other donations, the tithe of all the fruits of their thanages
and demesne lands, whether in money or in kind, within the sheriffdom of
Forfar, which he confirms; and King Robert Bruce, in a charter
confirming various rights and privileges to the prior and canons of
Roustinot in 1322, which they had possessed in the time of Alexander the
Third, includes the sum of twenty shillings and tenpence received
annually from the thanage of _Thanachayis_ or Tannadyce, and the second
tithes of the thanages of Old Monros, Duney, Glammes, Kingaltevy, and
_Aberlemenach_ or Aberlemno, and likewise of the three bondages or
servile lands of Forfar, viz., Trebog, Balmeshenor, and Esterforfar, six
merks from the barony of Ketnes, and forty shillings and a stone of wax
from the barony of Brechen; while a decreet of the deputies of the earl
of Ross, as Justiciary of Scotland north of the Forth in 1347, finds
that the prior was entitled to payment of the tithes of the thanages of
Monyfoth and Menmur, as well as the other thanages and and royal lands
within the shire of Forfar.[350]

The thanages within the earldom of Angus fall into two groups in the
northern and southern parts of the earldom respectively. Of the northern
group the beautiful valley of Clova, through which flow the upper waters
of the South Esk, forms the most westerly of the thanages, that of
Cloveth or Clova. In 1328 King Robert Bruce grants to Donald, earl of
Mar, his whole thanage of Cloveth, with two pendicles of land called
Petnocys, to be held in fee and heritage for payment of a _firma_ of
twenty pounds, and rendering the carriages and other small services due
and customary in the time of Alexander the Third;[351] and in 1359 the
sheriff of Forfar debits himself with nothing from the thanage of
Cloveth and the two Lethnottys, which return annually forty-two pounds,
because it is in the hands of the earl of Mar, but by what title he
knows not.[352] Here we find the pendicles of land termed Petnocys in
the charter are called Lethnottys in the rolls, which throws some light
on the meaning of Pit as a denomination of land. Leth means the half of
anything, and, as we have seen, was applied to the half of a penny land.
It here probably refers to the half of a ‘villa’ or township expressed
by ‘villula.’ Clova appears in the Record of Retours as a barony
containing the kirkton and other seven townships, and as having a
manor-place, mill, glens, and forests.[353]

Proceeding along the course of the South Esk, we find on its north bank
the thanages of Kingaltevy and Tannadyce, forming the parish of that
name. The thanage of Kingaltevy appears to have remained in the Crown as
late as the reign of Robert the Second, as that king grants in 1386 to
Sir Walter de Ogilvy for his service an annual rent of twenty-nine
pounds due and arising to him from the thanage of Kyngaltevy in the
sheriffdom of Forfar, but it appears in the retours as a barony.[354]
The thanage of Tannadyce, however, was granted by David the Second first
to Peter Prendergast, and afterwards to Sir John de Logy and the heirs
of his body, to be held blank for payment of a red falcon; and in
connection with this thanage we have a manumission by the same monarch,
the terms of which it will be interesting to preserve. It is termed a
charter of liberty, and is addressed to all good men to whom these
presents may come, and proceeds thus:—‘Be it known to you, that we have
made William the son of John bearer of these presents, who, as we are
told, was our serf and native man of our thanage of Tannadyce, within
the sheriffdom of Forfar, our free man, as well as all who proceed from
him, so that he and all proceeding from him, with all his progeny, shall
be free to dwell within our kingdom wherever he will; and we grant to
the said William and all proceeding from him that they shall be free and
quit of all native servitude in future.’[355] In the retours this
thanage too appears as a barony.[356]

Adjoining Tannadyce on the east, but on the south bank of the river, was
the thanage of _Aberlemenach_ or Aberlemno. Among the missing charters
of King Robert Bruce is one to William Dishington of Balgassie, in the
thanage of Aberlemnoche, and two to William Blunt, one termed ‘ane
bounding infeft’ of the thanage of Aberlemnoche, and the other ‘of the
mains of Aberlemnoche bounding;’[357] but in 1365 King David the Second
grants to Sir William de Dysschynton his lands of Balmany and mill of
Aberlemnache, and his lands of Tolyquonloch, and the annual rent of
Flemyngton, in the thanage of Aberlemnache, for military service.[358]
North of Aberlemno, and separated from it by the parish of Brechin lay
the thanage of Menmuir. This thanage appears in the reign of David the
Second as possessed by three persons, for he confirms a charter granted
to the prior and canons of Rostynot by Andrew Dempster, Finlay, son of
William, and John de Cullus, lords of the lands of Menmuir, regarding
the tithes of these lands,[359] and in the retours it appears as a
barony.

On the shore in the north-east corner of Angus was the thanage of Old
Monros or Monrose, and like Morphie this thanage was connected with an
_abthanrie_, for King William the Lion, in his foundation charter of the
monastery of Aberbrothok, includes in his grant the church of St. Mary
of Old Monros, with the church land, which in Scotch is called _Abthen_;
and in a subsequent charter grants to Hugo de Robesburg, his cleric, the
lands of the abbacy of Munros, to be held of the monastery of
Arbroath.[360] Two thanages are mentioned in close vicinity to it. On
the south bank of the Esk was the thanage of Kynnaber, from which an
annual rent of seven merks was granted by King Robert I. in 1325 to
David de Grame; and on the south side of the water of Luan was the
thanage of Edevyn, now Idvies. Two thanes are mentioned, viz., Gilys
Thayn de Edevy in 1219, and Malys de Edevyn in 1254, but we have no
further information with regard to either.[361] On the shore farther
south was the thanage of Inverkeillor. This thanage appears as early as
the reign of William the Lion to have been held feudally by the family
of De Berkeley, for Walter de Berkeley grants to the church of Saint
Macconoc of Innerkeledur (Inverkeillor), and Master Henry, its parson,
the king’s cleric and mine, the _Grescane_, and every service which the
church land and the men dwelling theron were wont to render to the
Thanes of Inverkeillor, and afterwards to myself; and frees them from
the _Grescane_ and every cane and rent belonging to us or to any lay
person, with the right of common pasturage along with him and his men
throughout the whole territory of Inverkeillor. This grant is confirmed
by King William,[362] and presents an analogous case to that of
Arbuthnot, whose cane was payable by the kirkton or church land to the
thanes, and afterwards to the feudal lord.

Of the southern group of thanages the most westerly, situated in the
south-west corner of Angus, was the thanage of Kathenes or Kettins, the
only notice of which is the appearance in 1264 of Eugenius, thane of
Kathenes, as possessing a large grange;[363] but there appears to have
been in connection with it an _abthanrie_, as certain lands in the
parish are termed in the retours ‘the lands called Abden of Ketins,’
They form but a small part of the parish, the larger portion probably
forming the thanage. North-east of Kettins, and separated from it by the
parish of Newtyle, was the much more important thanage of Glammis, which
possesses a fictitious interest from its supposed connection with the
career of Macbeth. It too makes its first appearance in 1264, when we
find a payment of sixteen merks to the Thane of Glammis for the lands of
Clofer and Cossenys, subtracted from the thanage of Glammis; and in 1290
the sheriff of Forfar accounts for twenty-seven cows as the _Waytinga_
of one and a half nights of the thanage of Glammis during two
years.[364] After the war of independence this thanage appears to have
remained in the hands of the Crown till the reign of Robert the Second,
when in the second year of his reign he grants to John Lyon his whole
lands of the thanage of Glammis, erected into a barony, with the
bondmen, bondages, native-men and their followers, and with the
tenandries and services of the freeholders (_liberetenencium_).[365]

On the shore of the Firth of Tay we find the thanedom of Monifieth, of
which the only notice is a missing charter by King Robert Bruce to
Patrick, his principal physician, of the lands of Balugillachie, within
the thanage of Monifieth, but here we likewise meet with an _abthanrie_;
the distinction, however, between the two is here apparent, for during
the reign of Alexander the Second we find that the former was, like most
thanages, held of the Crown, while the latter belonged to the earls of
Angus. Thus King Alexander grants to the monastery of Arbroath ten merks
annually, paid each year from his _firma_ or rent of Monifieth; while
Malcolm, earl of Angus, in the same reign, grants to Nicholas, son of
Bricius, priest of Kerimure, and his heirs, in fee and heritage, the
whole lands of the _abthein_ of Munifeth.[366] Adjoining Monifieth, in
the adjacent parish of Monikie, was the last of the Forfarshire
thanages—viz., that of Duny or Downie. In 1359 the sheriff charges
himself with nothing from the thanage of Duny, because it was then in
the hands of the earl of Sutherland heritably through his marriage with
the king’s sister.[367] But, at the same time, when Robert the Second
erected Glammis into a barony in favour of John Lyon, he grants a
similar charter in favour of Sir Alexander de Lyndesay of all and whole
his lands of the thanage of Downy, erected into a barony, with the
bondmen, bondages, native-men and their followers, and with the services
of the freeholders (_liberetenencium_) of the said barony.[368] In
connection with this thanage we find the waste land termed the Moor of
Downie.[369]

[Sidenote: Thanages in Fife and Fothriff.]

Crossing the Firth of Tay and entering the province of Fife and
Fothriff, we find the thanages few in number and at some distance from
each other, and this arises from the land having been extensively
granted at an early period as feudal holdings to the Saxon and Norman
followers of the king. In Fife we find traces of three thanages, and in
Fothriff of two. Those of Fife are, first, Kinneir in the parish of
Kilmany. We have no early notice of Kinneir as a thanage, but it was
afterwards a barony; and among the lands belonging to the barony we find
mention of the thainis lands, viz., those of Straburne, Fordell, and
Fotheris. Not far from it was the thanage of Dervesin or Dairsy. In a
charter granted by Ernald, bishop of St. Andrews, to the church of St.
Andrews, of the church of Dervesin, with a carucate of land in that
township, in his demesne, among the witnesses is Hywan, son of
Malcothen, Thain de Dervesin; and in the retours it appears as the
barony and demesne lands of Dairsie.[370] In the parish of Cairnbee, not
far from the shore of the Firth of Forth, we find the thanage of Kelly.
When King David the First granted to the priory of May the lands of
Balugallin, they were perambulated among others by Malmure, Thain de
Chellin or Kelly, and among the missing charters of Robert the First is
one to William Seward of the barony of Kelly.[371] In Fothriff we find
in the interior the thanage of Falkland, mentioned at a very early
period; for among those who perambulated the marches between Kyrkness
and Lochore in the reign of Alexander the First was Macbeath, Thaynetus
de Falkland, and we find that it afterwards became a royal forest.[372]
The only other thanage was that of Kinross.[373] We find in 1264, I de
Kynross, sheriff of Kynross, accounting for the Waytinga of four nights
in the year, amounting to forty cows, besides pigs, cheese, and grain.
This burden indicates that it had been a thanage, and it appears as such
in the reign of Robert the First, when an inquisition was held at
Kinross, on the 23d September 1323, regarding the lands of the forest of
Kinross, and these lands were separated from the thanage of Kinross. It
afterwards appears as a barony, with the castle, lake, and fishings of
Lochleven.[374]

[Sidenote: Thanages in Stratherne.]

Crossing the range of the Ochils and entering the ancient earldom of
Stratherne, we find one of the earliest residences of the old Scottish
kings appearing as a thanage. In the reign of Alexander the Third the
thane of Forteviot has to answer to the king for twenty merks, and we
find the sheriff of Perth subsequently accounting for the _firma_ or
rent-charge of the land of William of Forteviot;[375] while King Robert
the First grants in 1314 to the church and canons of Inchaffray his
lands of Cardnay and Dolcorachy in the thanage of Forteviot. It appears
in the retours as a barony.[376] In this earldom we meet for the first
time with a thanage held of the earl and not of the Crown. The
foundation-charter of the abbey of Inchaffray, granted by Gilbert, earl
of Stratherne, in the year 1200, is witnessed among others by Anechol
Theinus or thane of Dunine, now Dunning; and in a subsequent charter the
same earl terms him ‘Anechol, my thain of Dunyn.’ In 1247 a charter is
granted by Malise, earl of Stratherne, to the abbey of Inchaffray, of
twenty merks annually from the thanage of Dunyne and Peticarne, to be
received for all time in future from the hands of those who hold the
said lands for the time being; and in confirmation of this grant he
addresses a mandate to Bricius, thane of Dunin, to see twenty merks at
Dunin from the _firma_ due to the earl, paid to Inchaffray. The descent
of these thanes of Duning can, however, be ascertained from the
Chartulary. The most powerful family next to the earls was that of the
seneschals or stewards of Stratherne. They descend from Gilleness,
seneschal of Stratherne in the time of Earl Gilbert, who had two
sons—Malise, who appears as seneschal in 1220, and Anechol, who was
thane of Duning. From Malise proceeded a line of seneschals, the
succession to which was carried by a daughter to the Drummonds. Anechol
was succeeded as thane of Duning by Bricius, who likewise appears as
thane of Duning; but in the time of Robert, earl of Stratherne, the son
of Malise, the seneschalship had fallen to him likewise, and he
witnesses a charter of that earl as ‘Bricius de Dunin, his
seneschall.’[377] The lands of Duning and others were erected into the
barony of Duncrub in favour of Andrew Rollo of Duncrub in 1540; and
among the lands we find the thane lands also called Edindonyng.[378] One
of the charters by Earl Gilbert, which is witnessed by Anechol, thane of
Dunin, is likewise witnessed by Duncanus, Thanus de Struin. This is the
only notice of this thanage, but the name corresponds with that of the
parish of Strowan on the south bank of the Earn above Crieff. It is now
united with the parish of Monzievaird, from which it is divided by the
river. It was probably a thanage also held of the earl, and the old
family of the Toschachs of Monzievaird no doubt derived their name and
descent from its _Toschach_ or thane.[379]

[Sidenote: Thanages in Atholl.]

North of the earldom of Stratherne, and within the range of the
Grampians, lay the ancient earldom of Atholl. It is from this district
that the royal dynasty emerged which terminated with Alexander the
Third, the founder of the house having been lay abbot of Dunkeld, and
possessor of the _abthanrie_ of Dull,[380] and from his son Duncan
proceeded not only the kings of Scotland, but likewise the ancient earls
of Atholl. The _abthanrie_ of Dull was a very extensive district, and
embraced a large portion of the western part of the earldom, and may be
viewed as the original patrimony of the royal house. It contained within
it two thanages, viz., those of Dull and of Fothergill, now Fortingall.
Thus we find Alexander the Second issuing a mandate addressed to his
theyns and other good men of Dul and Forterkil, in which he grants to
the canons of Scon the right of taking materials from his thanages of
Dul and Forterkil for the work at their church of Scon.[381] In the
reign of Alexander the Third we find in 1264 Alan the Hostiary bound to
account for the _firma_ of Dull, and in 1289, Duncan, earl of Fife, is
_Firmarius_ or renter of the manor of Dull, the rent for two years being
five hundred pounds seven shillings and fourpence.[382] He is also
keeper of the prison of Dull, but while the _abthanrie_ with its two
thanages is thus in the Crown, the church of Dull, with its chapels of
Foss and Branboth in Glenlyon, belonged to the earls of Atholl, and was
granted by Malcolm, earl of Atholl, to the priory of St. Andrews after
the death of William his cleric. This grant is confirmed by the bishop
of Dunkeld, reserving a right to give the latter, to the extent of ten
merks, to a vicar, and an annual rent of twenty shillings due to him and
his clergy from the _Abthanrie_ of Dull.[383] By king David the Second
the bailiary of the _abthain_ of Dull was granted to John Drummond, and
in his reign the thanages began to be broken up, for he grants a charter
to John de Loorne, and Janet, his spouse, and our cousin, of the whole
lands of Glenlion; another to Donald M‘Nayre of the lands of
Estirfossach or Foss, in the abthanrie of Dull, which had been resigned
by Hugo de Barclay; and a third to Alexander Meinzies of the barony of
Fothergill, in the county of Perth.[384]

Besides these thanages held of the Crown, we find mention of two held of
the earl of Atholl, and two of the bishop of Dunkeld. On the north bank
of Loch Tay was the thanage of Cranach, but it no sooner appears in the
records than it vanishes as a thanage, for it passed into the Menzies
family, and among their writs is a charter by David de Strathbogie, earl
of Atholl and Constable of Scotland, to Sir Robert de Meygnes, knight,
son of Sir Alexander de Meygnes, for his homage and service, of the
whole thanage of Cranach, in the earldom of Atholl, with the lands of
Cranach, Achmore, Kynknoc, the two Ketherowes, and Achnechroish, as a
feudal holding for military service. The other thanage lay in the valley
of Glentilt, near Blair, and of it we have more particulars. The earldom
of Atholl had become vested in the person of Robert, Steward of
Scotland, and before he succeeded to the throne in 1371 he grants a
charter, as Lord of Atholl, which is undated, to Eugenius, thane of
Glentilt, brother of Reginald of the Isles, of the whole thanage of
Glentilt, being three davachs of land, for his faithful service, to be
held of him in fee and heritage for ever, for payment of eleven merks in
money, and the carriage of four horses once a year for hunting in the
forest of Bencromby if demanded. There is a provision that should the
yearly value of the thanage at any time not reach the sum of eleven
merks, he is to pay such sum as may be fixed by an assize of the
inhabitants of Strathguye and of those dwelling in the thanage. There is
then a retour at Logyraite in the court of the earl of Athole, by which,
on 29th July 1457, Andrew de Glentilt is served heir to his father John
le thane de Glentilt, in the lands of Petnacrefe in Strathguay; and a
charter of sale, in 1461, by Andrew, thane of Glentilt, to John Stewart
of Fothergill, of the lands of Achnamarkmore, to be held of himself; and
this is followed by a notarial instrument taken on the sale by Finlay
‘le thane de Glentilt,’ son and heir of the late Andrew le thane de
Glentilt, on 27th April 1647, of the right of reversion of these lands
for twenty pounds, payable in one day between sunrise and sunset. There
is then a precept of sasine by Findlay, thane of Glentilt, in favour of
Neill Stewart of Fothergill, as son and heir of Neill Stewart of
Fothergill, of the lands of Achnamarkmore, given at Glentilt on 4th June
1500, in presence of John, Thane, son and heir-apparent of Findlay, and
on 13th August 1501 a charter of sale by Finlay, thane of Glentilt, to
Elenore, countess of Atholl, of Kincraigy. We have then two charters of
even date, granted by John, earl of Atholl, and superior of All and
Whole the lands of the _Thanagium Abnathie_, or the thanedom of
Glentilt, to John Stewart, his son and heir, of the said lands _Thanagii
Abnathie_, or le thanedom of Glentilt, which formerly belonged to Finlay
Toschach, thane of Glentilt, and which he voluntarily resigned, as is
proved to us by his corporal oath sworn on the holy evangels of God. The
earl’s seal and the seal of Finlay Toschach are appended, at Dunkeld,
the last day of May 1502, and these charters are confirmed by a charter
under the Great Seal on 2d July 1502, of the thanage, with the bondmen,
bondages, native-men and their issue.[385] According to this charter the
thanage contained seventeen townships, including the two tenandries of
Achnamarkmore and Kincraigy, giving an average of about the sixth part
of a davach to each township; and we here see the family, which
originally descended from that of the Isles, adopting the name of
Toschach, from their designation of Thane. From them no doubt proceeded
the M‘Intoshes of Tiriny in Glentilt, which is included among the lands
of the thanage.[386] We find mention of two other thanages in Atholl,
but it is not very clear whether they were held under the earl, or under
the bishop of Dunkeld. King William the Lion confirms to the church and
canons of Scone a grant made to them by Malcolm, earl of Atholl, of the
church of Loginmahedd, now Logierait, with its chapels of Kilchemi,
Dunfolenthi, Kelkassin, and Kelmichelde Tulimath, and with all its other
lawful pertinents; but John, bishop of Dunkeld, grants and confirms to
the abbots and canons of Sconie the church of Logymahedd, in Atholl,
with the full tithes, benefices, and rights lawfully pertaining to said
church, viz., of Rath, which is the chief seat of the earldom (_caput
comitatus_), and of the whole thanage of Dulmonych, and of the whole
thanage of Fandufuith, and with these chapels, Kylkemy, Dunfoluntyn,
Kilcassyn, Kilmichell of Tulichmat, and all pertinents of said chapels,
and a toft in Logyn, with common pasture, as is contained in a charter
of Earl Henry.[387] The _Rath_ or fort is still visible on a height
between the two rivers at the junction of the Tay and the Tummel, and
the modern names of the places where the four chapels were situated are
Killichangie, Dunfallandy, Killichassy, and Tullimet, and they are all
within the parish of Logierait, but the two thanages seem not to have
been included in Earl Malcolm’s charter, and are situated within the
territory termed the bishopric of Dunkeld, now the parish of Little
Dunkeld, for Fandufuith is now Fandowie in Strathbraan, and Dalmonych is
probably Dalmarnoch, on the south bank of the Tay, in the same parish.
We have no other notice of these thanages.

[Sidenote: Thanages in Gowry.]

Between the earldom of Atholl and the province of Fife and Fothriff, and
separated from the latter by the Firth of Tay, lay the earldom of Gowry.
In the account of the seven provinces of Scotland prior to the Scottish
conquest, this earldom formed one province along with that of Atholl;
but after the Scottish dynasty was seated on the throne it was attached
to the province of Fife and Fothriff. It was the heart of the kingdom,
as within it was situated the royal seat of Scone, where, as Fordun
rightly tells us, ‘both the Scottish and Pictish kings had whilom
established the chief seat of government;’ and from an early period it
appears to have belonged to the royal family, as Bower makes the curious
statement that Alexander the First had received at his baptism, as a
donation from his father’s brother the earl of Gowry, the lands of Lyff
and Invergowry, where, after he became king, he began to build a palace,
and finally conferred them upon the abbey of Scone. These lands are in
fact contained in the foundation-charter of Scone by Alexander the
First, and that the earldom had been the appanage of Donald Bane, who
alone can be meant, is probably true enough.[388]

In the reign of Malcolm the Fourth, who confirms the foundation-charter
of Alexander the First, we find mention of the four royal manors of
Gouerin or Gowry paying _Can_ to the king, and these were Scon or Scone,
Cubert or Coupar-Angus, Forgrund or Longforgan and Stratherdel; and
these appear to have been likewise royal thanages. Thus Alexander the
Second grants to the canons of Scone, in exchange for tithes which they
exacted from the lands of Forgrund, one net of his fishings in the
thanage of Scone, two acres of land in the territory of Scone where the
Canon’s Well is situated, and a perpetual lease of his demesnes of Rath
and Kynfaunes in Gowry; and finally King Robert the First grants to the
abbot and canons of Scone the whole thanage of Scone, with all its
pertinents.[389] Strathardell, too, was a thanage, as we find a charter
granted in the reign of William the Lion by Laurence of Abernethy of the
church of Abernethy to the monks of Arbroath is witnessed by Macbeth,
sheriff of Scon, thane of Strathardel;[390] and though we have no notice
of the royal manors of Cupar and Forgrund being termed thanages, it is
probable that they were so.

North of Cupar, however, was the thanage of Alyth, in which was situated
the royal castle of Invercuych, as we find Robert the Second granting to
Sir James de Lyndesay All and Whole the lands of Aberbothry, as also the
place of the royal castle of Invercuyth and all the lands which belonged
to John de Welhame and John de Balcasky, in the thanage of Alyth, to be
held as a barony; and the same monarch includes the thanage of Alyth
with its pertinents in a subsequent charter to Sir James de Lyndesay of
the castle and barony of Crawford and other lands;[391] and in
connection with this thanage there appears to have been a forest, as in
two charters of King David the Second to the canons of Scone, Alyth is
mentioned among the royal forests.[392] As Alyth with its royal castle
was at the north-east extremity of Gowry, so we find at its north-west
boundary the thanage and royal castle of Kinclaven, on the west bank of
the Tay, near its junction with the river Isla. We find notices of the
repair of the castle in 1264, while the sheriff of Perth accounts for
its _firma_, and King Robert the Second grants to his illegitimate son,
John, his lands of Ballathys, Invernate, and Mukirsy in the thanage of
Kynclevin, with its tenandries and services of the freeholders, the
native-men, bondmen, and their bondages and followers.[393]

[Sidenote: Thanages south of the Forth.]

The thanages of which we have thus given shortly the history were all
situated north of the Firths of Forth and Clyde, and in those eastern
districts which formed originally the seat of the Pictish tribes, and
afterwards fell under the dominion of a dynasty of kings of Scottish
race. The Scots were thus a dominant race over a subject population, and
under the succeeding dynasty, who adopted Norman customs and assimilated
the laws and institutions of the country to those of a feudal monarchy,
these districts became the theatre of a Saxon colonisation and of a
gradually increasing settlement of Norman barons, who held the land on a
feudal tenure from the Crown; and thus the more ancient tenures
represented by the thanages were comparatively speaking few in number,
and scattered in isolated situations. But while the thanages in general
were thus situated, there was one thanage south of the Firth of Forth
which appears to belong to the same class. It was situated on the south
bank of the river Carron, and represented that small district,
distinguished in the Irish Annals by the name of _Calathros_, and in
Latin documents and chronicles as Calatria,—a name preserved in the more
modern Callender. The name of _Ecclesbreac_ by which the church was
known, and by which it is still called in the Highlands, indicates that
it was inhabited by a Gaelic-speaking people, and the term _Breac_ is
usually associated with those of Pictish race. They were probably the
remains of the old Pictish population which gave their name to the
Pentland Hills. Be this as it may, the notices of this thanage are in
entire harmony with those of the thanages north of the Forth. A charter
by King David the First to the canons of Stirling is witnessed by
Dufotir, sheriff of Stirling; and the same Dufotir witnesses a charter
of King David to the church of Glasgow, as Dufoter de Calatria. About
1190 appears Dominus Alwynus de Kalenter.[394] A charter by Herbert, son
of Herbert de Camera, of a half carucate of land in his territory of
Dumfries, consisting of four bovates or oxgangs near Louchbane, is
witnessed by Malcolm, thane of Kalentyr, and Alexander the Second grants
to the canons of Holyrood, in feu-farm, his whole lands of Kalentyr,
which had been in his hands since the day on which he assigned to
Malcolm, formerly thane of Kalentyr; forty pound lands in Kalentyr,
which lands are reserved to the said thane. Then we find the old thanage
converted into crown demesne, and the thane bought off with a feudal
holding. In the same reign a charter by Maldouen, earl of Lennox, is
witnessed by P., Thane of Kalentyr; and a missing charter of King David
the Second ‘to William Livingston of the lands of Callanter by
forfeiture of Patrick Calentyre,’ appears to terminate the line of the
thanes, and to indicate the conversion of the lands into a barony in
favour of the Livingston family.[395] A charter granted by David the
First before his succession to the throne, when the province of Lothian
and the ancient Cumbrian kingdom were under his rule, and addressed to
all his faithful _Tegns_ and _Drengs_ of Lothian and Teviotdale,[396]
shows that any thanes who appear in these districts where the population
was entirely Anglic, belong to the Saxon organisation, and have no
connection with the more northern thanages.

[Sidenote: _Toshachdor_ and _Toshachdera_.]

We have seen that the term Thane, in connection with that portion of the
crown land north of the Firths of Forth and Clyde called a thanage, and
considered as crown demesne, was the equivalent of the Gaelic _Toisech_
or _Toschach_, but we also find this word _Toschach_ used in Scotland in
combination with two other words nearly resembling each other, and thus
forming the two denominations of _Toschachdor_ and _Toschachdera_,
indicating in this form a person, and in the form of _Toschachdoracht_
and _Toschachderacht_, an office, just as the function of the Toisech is
expressed in the Irish system by _Toisecheacht_. Sir John Skene, in his
treatise _De Verborum Significatione_, gives under the word
_Toscheoderache_, several interpretations of it. He says that it was
‘ane office or jurisdiction, not unlike to a bailliarie, especially in
the Iles and Hielandes.’ ‘Some alleagis it to be ane office pertaining
to execution of summondis. Uthers understandis the same to be ane
crowner. Last, summe understandis it to be ane searchour and taker of
thieves and limmers.’ But it is obvious from his references that he
confounds the two offices together. The _Toschachdoracht_ was the office
like a bailiary, and the _Toschachdor_ was considered the equivalent of
the coroner, and this office was mainly confined to the Highlands and
Islands. The _Toschachdera_ he rightly explains, in his Notes to the Old
Laws, as a name given by the original Scots and Irish to the serjeand or
servitor of court who put the letters of citation in force, and that
this office was commonly called ‘ane Mair of Fee.’[397] We find the two
offices existed distinct from each other in the Isle of Man, and this
throws some light upon it. That island was divided into six sheadings,
and each sheading had two officers. The first was the coroner, and this
office, says Mr. Train, in his _History of the Isle of Man_, is of the
highest antiquity in the island. He is called in Manks _Toshiagh
Jioarey_, or chief man of the law. There is likewise, says Mr. Train, an
officer of unknown antiquity in every parish called a _Maor_, who
collects all escheats, deodands, waifs, and estrays.[398]

The _Toischeachdor_ derives his name from _Toisech_, and _Dior_, an old
word signifying ‘of or belonging to law,’ and is obviously the same as
the Manks _Toshiagh Jioarey_, and this office is not to be found in
those eastern districts where the thanages prevail, for the simple
reason that it is there represented by the _Toschech_ or Thane himself,
but the _Toiseachdera_ or Mair of Fee occurs repeatedly in connection
with them. Thus in the laws of King William the Lion, which gave the
form of citation, it is directed to be made by the serjeand or coroner
or _Tosordereh_ or other summoner;[399] and that the serjeand and
_Toshachdera_ are the same, will be evident on comparing a charter of
the thanage of Belhelvie, which mentions the office of smith and the
office of serjeand, with one of the demesne lands of Davochindore in
Kildrummy, where the same offices are called _Fabrisdera et
Toshachdera_.[400] We find in connection with the thanage of Moravia the
office of Mair of Fee,[401] and in 1476 the lord of Strathawin, in
Banffshire, grants to Alexander Crom Makalonen the lands of
Invercahomore, with the office of _Toshoderatus de Strathawin_.[402] We
can trace the appearance of this office too in connection with the
church lands in this part of Scotland. One of the earliest grants to the
bishop of Aberdeen was the schyra or parish of Rayne. It contained the
lands of Ledyntoschach, or the _Toschach’s_ half, and Rothmaise, in
which the word _Rath_ appears. These lands were held under the bishop by
a family of De Rane, and afterwards by a family called Tulidef, but in
1544 the bishop feus to Mr. Walter Stewart the lands of Invirquhaland,
Newmore, and two parts of Rothtmaise _cum ly Derachthowis_.[403] The
lands of Tarves, within the thanage of Fermartin, were conferred upon
the abbey of Arbroath by Alexander the Second, and in 1384 the abbot of
Arbroath confers the office of _Derethy of Terwas_ upon Thomas de
Lochane and the heirs of his body in perpetuity.[404] In the thanage of
Fettercairn we find, besides the thaneston, or mensal land of the thane,
another portion termed _Deray_ lands, or the possession of the
_Toschachdera_.[405] These notices will be sufficient to show the
existence of this office in connection with the thanages, to which a
portion of the land was assigned as official demesne.

[Sidenote: Result of survey of thanages.]

We have now completed our survey of the thanages which survived the war
of independence, and we thus see that there existed in the eastern
Lowlands isolated territories, scattered here and there among the feudal
holdings, still bearing the name of _Thanagium_, and preserving many of
the characteristics of the older Celtic tribe. These thanages during the
period of the rule of the kings of the race of David the First were
considered as forming part of the crown demesne, and were held of the
kings by persons called Thanes in feu-farm for payment of an annual
_firma_, rent or feu-duty, but their connection with the ancient tribe
lands is indicated by the fact that the feuar bearing the Saxon name of
Thane was likewise known by the Celtic name of _Toschach_, and therefore
represented the ancient _Toisech_ of the _Tuath_ or tribe, and that his
annual feu-duty was likewise known by the Celtic name of _Cain_, usually
amounting to about twelve merks, while the land was subject to another
burden termed _Conveth_, and afterwards _Waytinga_, which was no other
than the _Coinmhedha_ or _Coigny_ of the Irish tribes. These thanages
had therefore obviously replaced the more ancient _Tuath_, and what was
now regarded as crown land was the ancient tribe territory. It varied in
size, as did the Irish _Tuath_. Its principal measure of land bore the
Celtic name of Davach, a name also retained when the land had passed
into feudal holdings. Each davach contained four ploughgates, equivalent
to the Irish _Bally_ and the Welsh _Tref_, and the fourth part of the
ploughgate seems to have formed the smallest holding, and been known by
the Celtic term of _Rath_. The size of these thanages or tribe
territories held of the Crown varied from twelve to six davachs, and
those held of the earls seem in general not to have exceeded three. Part
of this territory was held by the thane or _Toschach_ in demesne, and
was known as the Thanestown or thane’s lands, and was cultivated by
bondmen or prædial serfs, of whom there were two kinds, the _bondus_, or
occupier of a servile tenement, amounting usually to the fourth part of
a ploughgate or township, and the native-man, who was servile by race.
Another part of the thanage consisted of tenandries, or free tenements,
held under the thane by a class of sub-vassals called _libere tenentes_,
or freeholders, for payment of a _Cain_ or feu-duty, and these were
likewise known by the Celtic name of _Octhigern_, the equivalent of the
Irish _Oclach_. They were in fact the lower of the two divisions of the
_Flaith_ or nobles of the Irish tribe, consisting of the _Aire ard_ and
the _Aire desa_, while from the upper division the _Ri Tuath_ or
_Toisech_, as the case might be, was chosen, and when we find the
territorial name of Dyce connected with some of the thanages, as Fordyce
in the thanage of the Boyne, Dyce in that of Kintore, Tannadyce in the
thanage of the same name, we can hardly avoid recognising the _Deis_, or
private property, which constituted the basis of the _Grad Flath_, or
territorial nobles of the tribe.

Between the class of freeholders and the servile class part of the land
was occupied by the _liberi firmarii_, or free farmers, who had a mere
usufruct of their possessions, which varied in size from the tenandry to
the small holding of two oxgangs, or the fourth part of a ploughgate.
These farmers usually held upon the system termed the Steelbow, when the
stock and implements belonged to the proprietor, and were handed over to
the tenant during his occupation of the land, who was bound to return an
equal value at the termination of his tenure, his rent being usually
paid in kind. This tenure closely resembled that of the _Saer_, or
_Ceile_, of the Irish tribe, while the _Daer_, or bond _Ceile_, were
represented by the _Bondi_, or occupiers of a servile holding in the
thanage.

Another portion of the thanage was the church land. When the church
consisted merely of the Cill, or parish church, it was known as the
_Terra ecclesiæ_, kirkton or Pettintaggart, and was cultivated by the
_Scolocs_, who paid _Cain_ to the thane, and _Conveth_ to the bishop in
whose diocese it was. It generally varied in size from a half davach to
a half ploughgate, but when a Columban monastery had been founded in the
thanage, it was of larger extent and fell into lay hands under the name
of _abbatie_, or _abthanrie_, paying, however, both _Cain_ and _Conveth_
to the church. This was in fact the _termon_ lands of the Irish tribe.
Lastly, what had originally been the waste land of the tribe became
known as the forest, and became dissociated from the cultivated land of
the thanage. It either formed the subject of a separate grant or was
retained as a royal forest.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                     THE FINÉ OR CLAN IN SCOTLAND.


[Sidenote: Clanship in the Highlands.]

Those influences which led to the _Tuath_ with its _Toisech_ passing
over into the Thanage and the Thane in the eastern districts were less
felt in the more mountainous regions of the north and west, where the
power of the Crown was comparatively weak, and more nominal than real,
and here the tribe went through a different process. While the large
districts continued to be ruled by their _Mormaers_ and the _Mortuath_,
and the Province existed intact, there was little of external influence
to affect the social organisation of their Celtic population; but the
same internal modification which led to the development of the sept or
clan from the tribe was no doubt silently at work, and when the break-up
of the great provinces and the alienation of the lands of the tribe to
feudal lords removed the veil, the clan appears exhibiting in the main
the characteristics of the Irish sept. The clan organisation was in the
main limited to that part of modern Scotland known as the Highlands and
Islands, where the mountainous and rugged character of the former and
the comparative inaccessibility of the latter led to the preservation of
a population of pure Gaelic lineage, speaking a Gaelic dialect. Here the
introduction, by marriage or royal grant, of feudal overlords with
apparently feudal holdings was purely nominal. It led to nothing like
the Teutonic colonisation which characterised the Lowlands, and neither
affected the Gaelic population nor the institution of clanship among
them.

[Sidenote: The Highland line.]

The boundary line which separated the Highlands from the Lowlands, and
known as the Highland Line, was in the main an imaginary line separating
the Gaelic-speaking people from those using the Teutonic dialect, but it
likewise coincides in part with the natural boundaries formed by those
physical features of the country which have influenced the relative
position of the Gaelic and Teutonic-speaking portion of the population
respectively. The southern part of this boundary coincides with the
great barrier formed by the mountain range of the Grampians, and where
this range is intersected by rivers which take their rise in the
interior of the highland region, and flow through this range to the
eastern sea, in deep ravines or narrow glens, with high mountains on
each side, were narrow passes which formed the entrances into the
Highlands, and were easily defended, rendering the country almost
inaccessible, while similar passes characterise the northern portion of
the line where it crosses the great rivers.

The Highland Line may be said at its southern end to commence at Loch
Lomond, in the earldom of Lennox, where the Pass of Balmaha between the
lake and the commencement of the mountain region leads into the district
of which this lake is the centre. The line then enters the earldom of
Menteith, and crosses the Forth, here called the _Avon dubh_, at
Aberfoil, and proceeds from thence to Callander, where the pass on the
north side of Loch Vennachar leads into the district formerly called
Strathgartney, and the Pass of Leny forms the entrance to Strathire and
to the district of Balquhidder. From Callander the line follows the
range of the Grampians, through the earldom of Stratherne, and crosses
the river Earn at Crieff, and the Almond at Findoch, where passes lead
to the upper part of the Vale of the Earn and to Glenalmond
respectively. From thence it follows the line of the Grampians to
Dunkeld, where the King’s Pass forms the entrance to Strathtay, and
through the district of Stormont in Gowry to Blairgowrie, where the
passes lead into the district of Strathardell. From thence it follows
the line of the Grampians till it crosses the Isla north-west of Alyth,
and enters the earldom of Angus, where the minor range of hills forming
the east side of Glenisla coincides with the line till it reaches the
great chain of the Mounth, or backbone of the Grampians, at Cairn
Bannoch. There it enters the earldom of Mar, and proceeds along the west
side of Glenmuich to the Dee at Ballater, where the Pass of Ballater
leads into the districts of Strathdee and the Forest of Braemar. North
of these districts it includes likewise the district of Strathdon,
crossing the river Don at Boat of Forbes, whence it proceeds to the
river Spey at Craigellachie, including the district of Strathavon, and
here a pass leads into the district of Strathspey, and separating the
mountain region of the earldom of Moray from the level plains forming
the southern seaboard of the Moray Firth, it terminates at the mouth of
the river Nairn, which flows through the town of Nairn, and formerly
separated the Gaelic-speaking people on its left bank from the lowland
population on the right. The Highland Line thus intersects the old
earldoms of Lennox, Menteith, Stratherne, Gowry, Angus, Mar, Buchan, and
Moray, which represented the older great Celtic tribes or _Mortuath_,
governed by their _Ri Mortuath_ or _Mormaers_, and the portion of each
earldom included in the Highland Line consisted of that part which
retained its Gaelic population intact, while the rest of it became more
or less colonised by foreign settlers.

[Sidenote: Break-up of the Celtic earldoms.]

The earldoms of Atholl, Ross, and Sutherland were entirely comprehended
within the Highland Line, as well as the great district of
_Arregaithel_, or Argyll, in its most extended sense, reaching from the
Clyde to Lochbroom, and a similar line drawn from the Ord of Caithness
to Brinsness on the west side of Thurso Bay separated the Gaelic
population in the more mountainous part of the ancient province of
Cathanesia, which from an early period had passed into the possession of
the Norwegian earls of Orkney, from the Teutonic settlers in the eastern
and more level plains. As long as the native race of the _Mormaers_
remained, though assuming the new character of earls, the connection
between them and the Gaelic population of the earldom remained
unimpaired; but when, by marriage or otherwise, the earldom passed into
foreign hands, the Gaelic population became the subjects of a foreign
overlord, the greater tribe became broken up, and they emerged from it
in the form of clans or broken tribes.

[Sidenote: Moray.]

The first of these great Celtic tribes to break up was that which formed
the great earldom, or rather petty kingdom, of Moray. Here we find a
family making their appearance in the eleventh century in the Irish
Annals as _Mormaers_ of Moray, and occasionally bearing the title of
_Ri_ or king. This line of Celtic kings or _Mormaers_ terminated with
Maelsnechtan, son of that Lulach mac Gillcomgan who succeeded Macbeth as
king of Scotland for three months. He appears as _Ri_ or king of Moray
in 1086, and after him Angus, the grandson of Lulach by his daughter,
bears the title of earl of Moray, and by his defeat and death in the
beginning of the reign of David the First the line of the ancient kings
or _Mormaers_ of Moray comes to an end, but the tribe appears to have
been still held so far together by their support of the claims of the
family of MacHeth to the earldom of Moray, whose founder Wymund asserted
himself to be the son of Angus, and of that of MacWilliam who claimed to
be the nearer line of the royal family to the throne of Scotland; and it
was not till the year 1222 that the pretensions of these two families
were finally extinguished by Alexander the Second.

[Sidenote: Buchan.]

About the same period the line of the Celtic Mormaers or earls of Buchan
had come to an end. The Book of Deer furnishes us with a tolerably
complete list of these Mormaers, from Bede the Pict in the sixth century
to Colban, earl of Buchan, in the reign of David the First; and we can
see from the history of the last four that they followed in the main the
Pictish law of succession, which preferred daughters to sons after
brothers. Donald, son of Ruadri, appears as _Mormaer_ of Buchan in the
reign of Malcolm the Second. He is followed by Donald, son of
MacDubhacain, who is succeeded by his brother Cainneach. The next
_Mormaer_ mentioned was his son Gartnait, but he appears to have derived
his right through his wife Ete, daughter of Gillamithil. He appears with
the title of earl in the reign of Alexander the First, and his daughter
Eva carries the earldom to her husband Colban. He is followed by his son
Roger, and he by his son Fergus, whose only daughter Margaret carried
the earldom to William Cumyn, who became in his right earl of Buchan,
and by Alexander the Second was made guardian of the earldom of Moray in
1222. Six years after, the districts of Badenoch and Lochaber were
conferred upon his son Walter Cumyn, on the rebellion, defeat, and death
of a certain Gillespic, by whom they had apparently been forfeited.

[Sidenote: Atholl.]

The same reign of Alexander the Second witnessed the termination of the
line of the Celtic earls of Atholl and Angus. The former earldom appears
to have been an appanage of the family from whom sprang the kings of the
race of Duncan, the son of Crinan, and its earls were descended from his
younger son, a younger brother of Malcolm Ceannmor.[406] The last of
this line was Henry, earl of Atholl, who died before 1215, and the
earldom passed to the eldest of two sisters, Isabella and Forflissa, who
married Thomas, earl of Galloway. On the death of his son Patrick in
1242 he was succeeded by his aunt Forflissa, the other sister, who
married David de Hastings, and by his daughter it was carried to the
Strathbolgie family, a branch of the earls of Fife.[407] But while the
earldom passed into the hands of a succession of foreign earls, a family
bearing the title of De Atholia continued to possess a great part of the
earldom, and were probably the descendants of the older Celtic earls.
The Gaelic population of the whole of the north-western portion of
Atholl, bounded on the east by the river Garry, and on the south by the
Tummel, remained intact under them, but the possession of the great
western territory of the _abthanrie_ of Dull by the Crown led to the
introduction of a foreign element among the landholders of the rest of
the earldom, and much of the land passed permanently into the possession
of the families of Menzies and Stewart, while the Celtic character of
the whole earldom was notwithstanding preserved.

[Sidenote: Angus.]

The same reign saw also the extinction of the old Celtic earls of Angus.
The Pictish Chronicle furnishes us with the names of three of its
Mormaers—Dubucan, son of Indrechtaig, who died about 935, and
Maelbrigdi, son of Dubucan, and this name again occurs in the ‘Dufugan
Comes’ who appears among the seven earls in the reign of Alexander the
First, and was no doubt earl of Angus. After him we have a succession of
four earls from father to son, viz., Gillebride, Gilchrist, Duncan, and
Malcolm; and Matilda, the daughter and heiress of the last earl, carried
the earldom by marriage first to John Comyn, who died in 1242, and then
to the Norman family of De Umphraville. The family of Ogilvie, who
retained possession of a considerable portion of the earldom, appear to
have been the male descendants of these old Celtic earls, and they
likewise gave a line of earls to Caithness, who possessed, with the
title of earl, one half of the land of the earldom. Of the land of the
earldom of Angus the district of Glenisla was alone included within the
Highland Line and preserved its Gaelic population.

[Sidenote: Menteith and Stratherne.]

The beginning of the reign of Alexander the Third saw the termination
too of the line of the old Celtic earls of Menteith. No mention of the
_Mormaers_ of this _Mortuath_ has been preserved, and the first earl,
Gilchrist, appears in the reign of Malcolm the Fourth. He was succeeded
by Murethac, who was followed by two brothers, both bearing the name of
Maurice, between whom there was a contention for the earldom in 1213,
which ended in the elder Maurice resigning the earldom to his brother
and retaining some of the lands for his life;[408] but Earl Maurice left
two daughters only, the eldest of whom married Walter Cumyn, and the
younger Walter Stewart, and carried the earldom to these families. The
western and more mountainous part of this earldom, consisting mainly of
the districts of Strathgartney and Strathire, retained its Gaelic
population. Of the early _Mormaers_ of the _Mortuath_ of Stratherne we
have no mention, but the line of its Celtic earls continued unbroken
till the reign of David the Second, when the forfeiture of one
interposed for a time a Norman baron, and the succession terminated in
co-heiresses, when the earldom came into the Crown, and was re-granted
to one of the Royal Stewarts; the western districts within the Highland
Line retained their Gaelic inhabitants.

[Sidenote: Mar.]

The only other of the frontier earldoms intersected by the Highland Line
was that of Mar, and here, like Buchan, we are on historic ground, for a
_Mormaer_ of Mar—Donald mac Emin mac Cainech—is recorded in a nearly
contemporary document as having been present at the battle of Clontarff
in Ireland, fought in the year 1014;[409] and Ruadri, _Mormaer_ of Mar,
who is mentioned in the Book of Deer, appears among the seven earls in
the reign of Alexander the First as ‘Rothri Comes.’ The line of the
Celtic earls of Mar continued till the reign of Robert the Second, when
it was carried by an heiress into the Douglas family, and afterwards to
one of the Stewarts, by whom it was resigned to the Crown. A great part
of the territory of the Celtic earls was at an early period carried off
from them by the family of De Lundin or Durward, who claimed the earldom
as representing the earls through a female, and were thus compensated,
but this part consisted of Lowland districts, and the Highland districts
of Strathdee, Braemar, and Strathdon constituted the ‘comitatus’ or
demesne of the Celtic earls, and preserved their Gaelic population.

[Sidenote: Ross.]

The history of the _Mortuath_ or earldom of Ross is peculiar, and became
eventually connected with that of the Lords of the Isles. Of the early
Celtic _Mormaers_ we have no record, and the supposed connection of
Macbeth with Ross as its _Mormaer_, which originated with George
Chalmers, has no historic foundation. He was, as we have seen, _Mormaer_
of Moray. The name of Gillandres appears in Wyntoun as one of the earls
who besieged Malcolm the Fourth in Perth in the year 1160; and the
Gaelic name of the old Rosses as _Clanghillandres_ seems to connect him
with this earldom, but it must have been immediately after in the Crown,
for the same Malcolm undoubtedly gave it to Malcolm MacHeth, who appears
as its earl, but was soon after expelled. It was afterwards bestowed by
William the Lion upon a foreigner, the Count of Holland; but his
successor, Alexander the Second, created Ferchard Macintaggart, the heir
of a line of lay abbots of Applecross, earl of Ross, who thus united the
extensive possessions of that monastery in North Argyll to the earldom,
and from him the later earls are descended. It became for a time broken
up, when an heiress carried the earldom to Walter de Lesly, and
afterwards to Alexander Stewart, earl of Buchan, but it reverted through
her daughter and heiress to the line of the Celtic Lords of the Isles.

[Sidenote: The _Gallgaidheal_ and their lords.]

But while the eastern and central tribes became broken up by the
termination of the line of the Celtic earls of the respective great
districts or _Mortuaths_, and thus either reverting to the Crown or
passing by marriage to Norman barons, those of the western seaboard and
of the Isles were held together for a longer period, and remained intact
till towards the end of the fifteenth century. These Gaelic inhabitants
of the Western Isles had been, as early as the ninth century, brought
under the rule of the Danes and Norwegians, and the latter had in the
eleventh century extended their sway over the western districts of the
highlands and over Galloway. These Gael were termed _Gallgaidheal_, the
word _Gall_ or foreigner being applied to both Danes and Norwegians,
both from being under their rule and from their having been in some
degree assimilated to their manners and become connected with them by
intermarriage; but the word _Gallgaidheal_ as a geographical term became
limited to the district of Galloway, which derived its name from them.
The Islands became known as _Innsigall_, or the islands of the
strangers, and western districts of the Highlands as _Airer_ or _Oirir
Gaidheal_, the coast land of the Gael, from whence the name of Argyll is
derived. Two Celtic chiefs, as we have seen, succeeded at the same time
in driving the Norwegians out from the mainland of Scotland, and
Somerled, establishing himself as king over the whole of the extensive
district known by the name of Ergadia or _Oirirgaidheal_, extending from
the Clyde to Lochbroom, and had likewise wrested from the Norwegian
kings of the Isles the southern half of them lying to the south of the
promontory of Ardnamurchan, over which his descendants ruled with almost
regal sway, while Fergus founded a line of Celtic lords of Galloway.
Somerled left three sons—Dubhgal or Dugald, Reginald, and Angus, among
whom his dominions were divided. Dubhgal received the district of Lorn,
extending from Lochleven to the Point of Ashnish, and also that of
Morvern; Reginald obtained the districts of Kintyre and Cowall, and the
islands which Somerled had possessed were divided between them, Dubhgal
having Mull and the small islands adjacent to it, and Reginald the
important island of Isla, with those in the Firth of Clyde. Angus’s
possessions appear to have lain north of the others, but a struggle
seems to have taken place between him and Reginald, which resulted in
Angus being slain with his three sons in 1210 by the sons of Reginald.
Soon after, the conquest of the great district of Argyll by Alexander
the Second took place, and the descendants of Somerled appear to have
been among the lords who were confirmed in their possessions by that
monarch, but their possessions in the Isles were still held of the
Norwegians till the cession of the Isles in the reign of Alexander the
Third. Reginald had left two sons, Donald and Ruaidri or Roderick, the
former succeeding his father in Kintyre and Isla, and the latter
obtaining Bute and Arran, and likewise the possessions which had been
wrested from Angus, and consisted mainly of the district extending from
Ardnamurchan to Glenelg, and known by the name of Garmoran; while the
district of Lochaber, which had been forfeited, passed into the
possession of the Cumyns. The descendants of Dugald and Reginald thus
shared the possessions of Somerled between them, and we find the heads
of the respective families—Alexander, son of Eogan, son of Duncan, son
of Dubhgal, Angus Mor son of Donald, and Allan son of Roderic—appearing
at the Scottish parliament in 1284, when the crown was settled on the
Maiden of Norway; but the families having taken opposite sides in the
war of succession—the head of the line of Dubhgal, John of Lorn,
supporting the cause of Baliol, and the head of the line of Reginald
that of Bruce—the latter became the predominant family. Angus Og, son of
Angus Mor, the head of the family who had supported Bruce, received from
him when established on the throne the lands of Morvern, Ardnamurchan,
and Lochaber, with the islands which had belonged to the Lords of Lorn.
These lands and islands, with Kintyre and Isla, were confirmed to his
son John by David the Second, who likewise confirmed to Reginald son of
Roderic, the lands of Garmoran, with the small islands north of
Ardnamurchan and the southern half of the Long Island; but Reginald
having been slain in a quarrel with the earl of Ross at Perth in 1346,
his possessions passed with his sister Amie by marriage to John the son
of Angus,[410] and thus this latter family became known as the powerful
Lords of the Isles, ruling over the territories of the Macdonalds of
Isla and Kintyre, the MacRuaries of Garmoran and the North Isles, and a
great part of those which had belonged to the Lords of Lorn. Their
position was still further strengthened by the marriage of John, Lord of
the Isles, with the daughter of Robert, High Steward of Scotland, for
which connection he had apparently repudiated his first wife Amie; and
when the line of the Lords of Lorn of the race of Dubhgal came to an
end, and the lordship of Lorn passed to the Stewarts of Innermeath by
marriage with the daughter and heiress of John, Lord of Lorn, before
1388, the Lords of the Isles were left without a rival in their rule of
the Gaelic population of Argyll and the Isles. John, Lord of the Isles,
had by his first marriage with Amie MacRuarie, three sons, John,
Godfrey, and Ranald; and by his second marriage with the Lady Margaret
Stewart likewise three sons, Donald, John, and Alexander; and when
Robert the High Steward succeeded to the throne in 1370, his influence
led to an arrangement by which the children of the Lord of the Isles by
his second marriage, who were the king’s grandsons, were to be preferred
to the children of the first marriage in the succession to the Isles,
while the possessions of the MacRuarie family, which he had inherited
through his first wife, were to be secured to the first family as the
price of their acquiescence. Accordingly, in the first year of his
reign, King Robert confirms to John, Lord of the Isles, the territory on
the mainland and the Isles which had belonged to Alan, son of Roderic,
and in the following year confirms a grant by the Lord of the Isles of
these possessions to his son Reginald, the youngest of the three
brothers, who appears to have agreed to the arrangement, the eldest son,
John, having predeceased his father, and the second, Godfrey, having
apparently refused to surrender his rights; and a few years later
charters are granted to the Lord of the Isles and to the heirs of his
marriage with Margaret, the king’s daughter, of the island of Colonsay
with its pertinents, and the lands of Lochaber, Kintyre, and one half of
Knapdale. On the death of the Lord of the Isles in 1380, Reginald
fulfilled his engagement by causing Donald to be recognised as Lord of
the Isles, and having him inaugurated by the usual Celtic solemnities as
such; while Godfrey appears to have for a time maintained his right to
his mother’s inheritance, which, however, was soon extinguished by the
failure of heirs-male.

Donald thus appears to have entered peaceably into possession of the
lordship of the Isles, and his marriage with Margaret, daughter of
Walter Lesly, earl of Ross, added a claim to that earldom on the death
of her brother Alexander, earl of Ross, who left an only daughter who
became a nun. This claim being contested by the Regent Duke of Albany,
who had obtained a renunciation from the nun, led to the great battle of
Harlaw, where the whole force of the Western Highlands and Isles, as
well as those of the earldom, was pitted against the Government; and
though the issue of the battle was doubtful, the Lord of the Isles
maintained his possession of the earldom, and his title as Earl of Ross
was eventually admitted, and he was succeeded in 1420 by his son
Alexander, as Earl of Ross and Lord of the Isles. The position of the
Lords of the Isles, as virtually independent rulers of nearly the whole
of the Highlands with the Isles, was now so powerful, that their
authority and that of the Crown came into constant collision, and it is
necessary, for our purpose, that the leading incidents should be shortly
stated. On the accession of James the First in 1424, he appears to have
strengthened his party against the family of the Regent Albany by
confirming the widow of the Lord of the Isles, and her son Alexander, in
the earldom of Ross; and the latter, as Lord of the Isles and Master of
the earldom of Ross, sat upon the jury which condemned Murdoch, Duke of
Albany, and his father-in-law, the Earl of Lennox, to death; but after
his object was attained, this vigorous monarch seemed to feel the
necessity of bringing the Highlands more under his control. The mode by
which he endeavoured to accomplish this was characteristic. He summoned,
in 1427, a Parliament to meet at Inverness, at which the Highland chiefs
were invited to attend, and as soon as they obeyed his summons, arrested
them to the number of fifty and committed them to prison. The
chroniclers enumerate among them—Alexander, Lord of the Isles, and his
mother the Countess of Ross; Angus Duff with his four sons, leader of
four thousand men of Strathnaver; Kenneth More with his son-in-law,
leader of two thousand men; John Ross, William Lesly, Angus of Moray,
and Mackmahon, leaders of two thousand men each; and he put to death
Alexander Makreury of Garmoran, leader of a thousand men, and John
Makarthur, a great chief among them, and likewise leader of a thousand
men, who were beheaded. The rest were sent to various prisons, where,
after a time, some were put to death and others liberated.[411] Among
those who were liberated were the Lord of the Isles and his mother, and
he seems to have lost no time in endeavouring to revenge himself, for in
1429 he summoned all his vassals in Ross and the Isles, and advanced
against the town of Inverness, which he burnt to the ground after he had
wasted the crown lands; but on the appearance of the royal army, with
King James at its head, he retreated to Lochaber, where the king
followed him, and the Lord of the Isles having been deserted by part of
his troops, he was attacked and defeated, and eventually surrendered
himself unconditionally to the king, when he was imprisoned in Tantallon
Castle, and his mother was also arrested and confined at Inchcolm, in
the Firth of Forth. Along with the earl of Ross, we find in prison
Lachlane M‘Gillane, Torkill M‘Nell, Tarlan MacArchir, and Duncan
Persoun.[412]

The imprisonment of the earl of Ross and his mother led to an
insurrection in the west, when the Highlanders under Donald Balloch, a
cousin of the earl, defeated the royal troops, under the earls of Mar
and Caithness, at Inverlochy in Lochaber in 1431, when the former was
killed; but on the appearance of the king himself with additional
forces, Donald Balloch fled to Ireland, and the other chiefs made their
submission. In consequence of this insurrection, the king appears to
have seen the policy of setting the earl of Ross at liberty and
attaching him to his service by conferring upon him the important office
of Justiciar of Scotland north of the Forth, an office which he held
during the minority of James the Second. He appears, however, to have
entered into a league with the earls of Douglas and Crawford, in 1455,
for the dethronement of that monarch, but died in 1449 before any overt
attempt had been made to carry it into effect. Alexander, earl of Ross,
like his grandfather, seems to have formed one potent alliance with the
Lowland nobility by his marriage with Elizabeth Seton, daughter of
Alexander, Lord of Gordon and Huntly, while he had—either before or
after—added to his possessions by marriage with daughters of Highland
chiefs. By his countess Elizabeth he had John, who succeeded him as Earl
of Ross and Lord of the Isles. By the daughter of Giollapadraig, the
last of the lay abbots of Applecross, and known to tradition as the Red
Priest, with whom he obtained the lands of Lochalsh, Lochcarron, and
others, he had a son Hugh, to whom he gave the lands of Sleat in Skye;
and by a daughter of _Mac Dubhshithe_ or Macphee, of Lochaber, he had
Celestine or Gilleaspic, to whom he gave the lands of Lochalsh. During
the reign of James the Second, John, earl of Ross, was occasionally at
variance with the Crown, and at other times on good terms with the king,
and under his influence was married to the daughter of Sir James
Livingston; but soon after that king’s death, he entered into a league
with the earl of Douglas and King Edward the Fourth of England for the
conquest and partition of Scotland, in 1462, and immediately raised the
standard of revolt. Having assembled a large force, he made himself
master of the castle of Inverness, and proclaimed himself supreme over
the sheriffdoms of Inverness and Nairn, which then embraced the whole of
the north of Scotland over which he placed his natural son Angus as
lieutenant. In consequence of this act, and of the treaty with England
coming to light, he was summoned at his castle of Dingwall to appear
before a Parliament in Edinburgh to answer to various charges of
treason, and failing to attend, sentence of forfeiture was pronounced
against him in 1475. In order to carry this sentence into effect, an
expedition consisting both of a fleet and land force was sent against
him under the command of the earls of Crawford and Atholl, and this led
to his suing for pardon through the medium of the earl of Huntly, and he
eventually surrendered himself to the royal mercy. He was restored to
his forfeited estates, which he immediately resigned to the Crown. The
earldom of Ross was annexed to the Crown, and the rest of his estates,
with the exception of Kintyre and Knapdale, were regranted to him by
royal charter, and he was created a baron banrent and peer of Parliament
by the title of Lord of the Isles, with remainder to his two natural
sons, Angus and John. The old Celtic lordship of the Isles was thus
converted into a feudal barony in 1476.

Angus was soon after married to a daughter of the earl of Argyll, by
whom he had a son Donald Dubh, but was treacherously slain in 1490 at
Inverness by an Irish harper. The repeated attempts which had been made
to recover the earldom of Ross, and other acts committed in name of the
aged Lord of the Isles, led to his being again forfeited and deprived of
his titles and estates in a Parliament held at Edinburgh in May 1493, on
which he retired to the monastery of Paisley, and died there in 1498,
and was interred in the tomb of his royal ancestor King Robert the
Second. Although several attempts were made after his death by the
western chiefs to raise up his grandson Donald Dubh and his nephew
Donald Gallda, the son of Celestine, as Lords of the Isles, this was the
final termination of the dynasty of the Celtic Lords of the Isles, which
practically ceased to exist in 1476 at his first forfeiture, and the
Gaelic population, which had been kept together by the power and
authority of their great chiefs, became now broken up.[413]

[Sidenote: Lennox.]

The line of the Celtic earls of Lennox had come to an end during the
life of Alexander, earl of Ross, when Duncan, earl of Lennox, was
executed in 1425, and the earldom passed into the hands of the Stewarts.

[Sidenote: The _Toshachdoracht_.]

The fifteenth century thus saw the last of the great Celtic tribes
broken up; but while this process of disintegration from external
influence had thus overtaken the greater tribes or _Mortuath_ one after
another, their extinction as leading features in the Celtic tribal
organisation did not disclose the lesser tribes or _Tuaths_ in their
entirety. They, too, had been undergoing a process of internal change
similar to that which had affected the Irish tribes and led to the
development of the septs or clans, gradually severed more and more from
the parent tribe, till the bond of union between them became impaired,
and all tradition of their earlier existence as members of a larger
organisation became lost. But while the original tribe had ceased thus
to exist in that part of the country which retained its Gaelic
population, as an actual element in its social organisation, it left an
evidence of its previous existence in the lesser districts into which
the larger territories were divided, and which still remained as a
geographical feature; where an officer bearing the name and some of the
functions of the ancient _Toisech_ of the _Tuath_ is still found in
connection with some of them. This was the _Toshachdoracht_ or office of
_Toschachdoir_, which was considered equivalent to Coroner. It was
rendered in Latin by _capitalis legis_, and signified in English,
principal of law. Thus, in that part of the great district of Argyll
which formed the original kingdom of Dalriada, we find the districts of
Cowall, Kintyre in its largest sense, and Lorn, obviously representing
the ancient _Tuaths_ into which the population of the kingdom had been
divided, and we likewise find Archibald, Master of Argyll, granting in
1550 to Campbell of Ardkinlas the office of Coroner, _alias
Thoshisdoir_, viz., _Tosheochdorachtie_ of the lands of Cowall, from
Claychin Toskycht to the Points of Toward and Ardlawmonth.[414] In 1539
Alane M‘Lane was appointed by King James V. _Toschachdoir_ of all
Kintyre, from the Mull to Altasynach;[415] and the same king appointed,
in 1542, Neill mac Neill to the same office.[416] In 1455, John, Earl of
Ross and Lord of the Isles, confirms to Neill mac Neill a grant made by
his father, Alexander, Earl of Ross and Lord of the Isles, to Torquel
M‘Neill, constable of the castle of Swyffin, the father of Neill, of the
office called _Toshachdeora_ of the lands of Knapdale.[417] In 1447 we
find Sir Duncan Campbell as king’s lieutenant within the parts of
Argyll, granting to Reginald Malcolmson, of Craignish, the offices of
Steward, _Tosachdoir_, and Mair of the whole land of Craignish, and the
office of _Tosachdoir_, _ex parte regis_, within the same bounds; when
the heir was under age, to be held by his tutor, with consent of his
clan, viz., the Clandowil Cragniche.[418] In 1572, Archibald, Earl of
Argyll, grants to Colin Campbell of Barbrek certain lands with the
coronership of the lands and baronies of Glenurquhay, the two Lochaws,
Glenaray, Glenshyro, Ardskeodnich, Melfort, and Barbrek, that is, of the
district forming the central part of Argyll between Lorn and
Lochfyne.[419] In another grant, it is termed the office of
_Tosheadorach_ of the lands lying west of Lochfyne.[420] That part of
the great district of Argyll which pertained to the earldom of Moray
contained the lesser districts of Lochaber, Morvaren, Ardnamurchan, and
Garmoran, and here too we find the Lord of the Isles granting, in 1456,
to his esquire Somerled, son of John, son of Somerled, for life, and to
his eldest son for five years after his death, a _davach_ of his lands
of Gleneves, with the office commonly called _Tocheachdeora_ of all his
lands of Lochaber, and he seems to have derived from it the name of
_Toche_ or _Toshach_, as in 1553 or 1554 the same lands of Gleneves are
granted to his grandson, here called Donald Macallaster Mic Toche.[421]

There is no trace of the office of _Toschachdor_, under this name, in
connection with the more eastern districts of Moray, but there is no
reason to doubt that such districts as Badenoch, Strathspey,
Strathdearn, Strathnairn, Stratherrich, and the Aird, represented what
had formerly been tribe territories or _Tuaths_, and the same may be
predicated of similar districts in the northern earldoms. In Atholl, as
we have seen, the thanages appear even though within the Highland Line,
but here we find the office of _Toschachdor_ in connection with one
district in Breadalbane which was adjacent to one of these thanages, for
among the lands of the earldom of Breadalbane we find the thanage of
Cranach, with the office of _Toshachdoiraship_ of Ardtholony,[422] and
the office likewise appears in Lennox, where Malcolm, earl of Lennox,
grants to Patrick de Lindsay the office of _Tosheagor_ of Lennox.[423]
We find a trace of it, too, in Galloway, where the office of coroner
between the rivers Dee and Nith and the _Toshachdoracht_ of Nithsdale
appear to be the same.[424]

[Sidenote: First appearance of clans.]

But while the more ancient tribal forms had thus undergone a process of
change and modification similar to that which characterised the Irish
tribe, and left merely its shadow behind it in the geographical district
and the function of the _Toshachdoracht_, it is in the reign of David
the First that the sept or clan first appears as a distinct and
prominent feature in the social organisation of the Gaelic population,
and owing to the light thrown upon the ancient state of the earldom of
Buchan as a Celtic _Mortuath_ by the Book of Deer only. During the
period of the _Mormaers_ of Buchan prior to Garnait and Colban, who were
_Mormaers_ or earls in the reign of David, we find the _Toisechs_
mentioned generally as concurring in grants of land; but in the time of
these two _Mormaers_ a grant of land is made by Comgill mac Caennaig,
_Tosech_ of Clan Canan; and Colban, _Mormaer_ of Buchan, and Eva,
daughter of Garnait his wife, and Donnachach mac Sithig, _Toisech_ of
Clan Morgan, mortmained all the previous offerings to God, Drostan,
Columcille, and Peter, that is, to the monastery of Deer, and this grant
is witnessed, among others, by the two sons of the _Toisech_. The
_Toisech_ of the _Tuath_ had thus by this time acquired a sufficient
_Deis_ to form a sept of his kin and dependants, of which he now appears
as the head, but the clans in this district only show themselves to
disappear at once before the advancing colonisation of the eastern
districts by a Teutonic population.

[Sidenote: Clan Macduff and its privileges.]

In the same reign we find a Gaelic sept or clan appearing where we might
least expect to find it, viz., in the province of Fife and Fothriff,
where the Clan Macduff figures from an early period in both the mythic
and the real history of Scotland, and has acquired a fictitious
importance from the supposed connection of its founders with the usurper
Macbeth, from which the privileges known as the law of the Clan Macduff
were supposed to be derived. The well-known tale of how Macduff was
Thane of Fife in the reign of Macbeth, how he incurred the resentment of
the usurper and fled to England from his wrath, how his wife and
children were slaughtered, and how he brought back Malcolm, the son of
King Duncan whom Macbeth had slain, and how he killed Macbeth in the
battle which placed Malcolm on the throne, first appears in the
Chronicle of John of Fordun,[425] but he does not notice the privileges
supposed to be conferred upon him and his descendants. These first
appear in an addition made to the Chronicle by his interpolator Bower,
the abbot of Inchcolm. According to him, after Malcolm was crowned,
Macduff, thane of Fife, came to him, and requested and obtained three
privileges, in reward for his faithful service, for himself and his
successors, lords or thanes of Fife:—First, that they should place the
king in his royal seat or chair on his coronation day; second, that they
should lead the vanguard in every battle in which the royal standard was
unfurled; third, that they, and every one of their kin, on the occasion
of any sudden and unpremeditated homicide, should enjoy the privilege of
the law of Macduff, the gentry on paying twenty-four marks as kinbot,
and the commonalty on paying twelve marks receiving a plenary
remission.[426] Wyntoun gives the same account of the three privileges,
but adds—

               ‘Off this lawch are thre capytale;
               That is the Blak Prest off Weddale,
               The Thayne off Fyffe, and the thryd syne
               Quha ewyre be Lord of Abbyrnethyne.’[427]

Sir John Skene, however, attaches the third privilege to the Croce of
the Clan Macduff which divides Stratherne from Fife, as a privilege and
liberty of girth in such sort that when any manslayer, being within the
ninth degree of kin and blood to Macduff, sometime earl of Fife, came to
that cross and gave nine cows and a colpindach, or year-old cow, he was
free of the slaughter committed by him, and quotes a charter by David
the Second to William Ramsay of the earldom of Fife, with the law called
Clan Macduff.[428] The existence of this privilege is so far confirmed
that in a Parliament of King Robert the Second, held in 1384, in which
certain laws were enacted regarding _Katheranes_, the earl of Fife
agreed that as ‘principal of law of Clan Macduff’ (_capitalis legis de
Clen m’Duffe_), he would cause them to be observed within his
bounds;[429] and in the fragmentary code of laws it is enacted that the
_duellum_, or wager of battle, may be remitted in three instances, the
second being ‘by the law of the Clan Macduff for the slaughter of one of
the kin, if the kin of the other party can come in the place of combat
when the appealer is proven, and his lance.’[430] We thus see that when
the line of the Celtic Earls of Fife, the hereditary _Toshachs_ of the
tribe, failed, they were replaced by the _Capitalis legis_, ‘Capytale of
lawch,’ or _Toshachdor_, the principal being the alien Earl, to whom
Wyntoun joins the priest of Wedale, a parsonage belonging to St.
Andrews, and the Lord of Abernethy, the descendant of the old abbots of
the monastery of that name. Hector Boece pushes the origin of the clan
as far back as the reign of Kenneth MacAlpin, the founder of the
Scottish dynasty, who, according to that veracious chronicler, appointed
governors of the different provinces, that of Fife being a certain Fifus
Duffus.

There were of course no thanes of Fife at any time. The first appearance
of the name on record is in the reign of David the First, when
Gillemichel Macduff witnesses an early charter of that monarch to the
monks of Dunfermline, along with five earls, one of whom is Constantine,
earl of Fife, and he certainly is the same person who witnesses the
foundation charter of Holyrood shortly after as ‘Gillemichel Comes,’ and
had thus become earl of Fife.

The demesne of the earls of Fife of this race appears to have consisted
of the parishes of Cupar, Kilmany, Reres, and Cameron in Fife, and those
of Strathmiglo and Auchtermuchty in Fothriff,[431] near which Macduff’s
Cross was situated, but whether this sept were the remains of the old
Celtic inhabitants of the province, or a Gaelic clan introduced into it
when its chief was made earl, it is difficult to say, but it is not
impossible that it may have been a northern clan who followed Macbeth
when the southern districts were subjected to his rule, and that there
may be some foundation for the legend that the founder of the clan had
rebelled against him, and adopted the cause of Malcolm Ceannmor, and so
maintained his position. The fact that the race from whom the _Mormaers_
of Moray derived their origin is termed in one of the Irish Genealogical
MSS. Clan Duff, and the earls of Fife undoubtedly possessed from an
early period large possessions in the north, including the district of
Strathavon,[432] lends some probability to this supposition. The
privileges of the clan, however, stand on a different footing. From the
earliest period the territory of Fife comes prominently forward as the
leading province of Scotland, and its earls occupied the first place
among the seven earls of Scotland. The first two privileges of placing
the king on the Coronation Stone, and of heading the van in the army,
were probably attached to the province of Fife, and not to any
particular tribe from which its earls might have been derived, while on
the other hand the third seems derived from the institution connected
with the ancient _Finé_, by which the kin formed a class of seventeen
persons, consisting of the _Geilfiné_, _Deirbhfiné_, _Indfiné_, and
_Iarfiné_, and the nine degrees of kindred of the Clan Macduff
correspond to the first two, which consisted of nine persons, traces of
which can also be found in the Welsh Laws.

Whilst the sept or clan thus makes its appearance in these few instances
beyond the Highland Line, it no doubt had already assumed an equally
distinct form within that boundary; but whatever may have been the
condition of the clans in the more inaccessible region of the Highlands,
history throws little light upon their existence till they emerge beyond
it towards the end of the fourteenth century.

[Sidenote: Description of Highlanders—1363-1383.]

Fordun, who concludes his Chronicle immediately before the first
appearance of a Highland clan beyond the Highland Line, gives the
following description of the inhabitants of the Highlands:—‘The
Highlanders and people of the Islands are,’ he says, ‘a savage and
untamed nation, rude and independent, given to rapine, ease-loving, of a
docile and warm disposition, comely in person but unsightly in dress,
hostile to the Anglic people and language, and, owing to diversity of
speech, even to their own nation, and exceedingly cruel. They are,
however, faithful and obedient to their king and country, and easily
made to submit to law, if properly governed.’[433] This is a picture
drawn by one who had no friendly feeling towards them, but the good
qualities with which he credits them, of being of a docile and warm
disposition, and faithful and obedient to their king and country, read
as strangely to us when their subsequent history is taken into account,
as Fordun’s opinion that the dress is unsightly hardly corresponds with
modern taste. At the time he wrote, however, he was warranted in what he
said, for from the time when Alexander the Second finally suppressed the
rebellion of the people of Moray, and conquered Argyll in the early part
of his reign, to his own day, they had not broken out beyond their
mountain barrier, and these early rebellions arose from their adherence
to a family which they believed had a rightful claim to the throne, just
as those of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were the result of
their attachment to the cause of the Stewarts.

[Sidenote: Raid into Angus in 1391.]

This state of quiescence was not destined, however, to continue long,
and within eight years after the death of the chronicler the irruptions
of the Highlanders into the low country were renewed, and they now
appear in the form of separate septs or clans. Robert the Second had, in
the first year of his reign, granted the lands of Badenoch, which had
been forfeited by the Cumyns, to his fourth son, Alexander, who, from
his fierce disposition, became known as the Wolf of Badenoch, and some
years after he obtained grants of the lands of Strathavon, which had
belonged to the earls of Fife, and of Abernethy in Strathtay. Alexander
had no family by his wife Eupham, countess of Ross, but a number of
illegitimate sons; and Bower tells us that in 1391 the Caterans, as he
calls them, invaded the Braes of Angus with Duncan Stewart, one of his
sons, at their head, and were encountered by Walter Ogilvy, sheriff of
Angus, with such of the barons of Angus and their followers as he could
hastily summon, at a place called by him Glenbrereth, where the sheriff
was slain with sixty of his followers.[434] Wyntoun gives a very graphic
account of this raid, which he places in the subsequent year, when he
says, ‘There arose a great discord between Sir David of Lindsay, son of
Glenesk, and the Highlandmen, and that in consequence of the former
sending a secret spy into the Highlands, a great company of Highlandmen,
to the number of three hundred and more, came suddenly into Angus under
three chieftains, Thomas, Patrick, and Gibbon, whose surname was
Duncanson, and encountered the sheriff at Gasklune, in the Stormont,
where the latter was slain.’[435] It is unnecessary to enter into the
particulars of the conflict, striking though the details are, but we
have more certain information as to the leaders of the Highlanders in a
Brief issued by King Robert the Third at a general council held at Perth
on the 26th March 1392, and addressed to the sheriff and bailiffs of
Aberdeen, directing them to put to the horn as outlaws the following
persons, guilty of the slaughter of Walter de Ogilvy, Walter de Lichton,
and others of the king’s lieges:—viz., Duncan and Robert Stewarts,
Patrick and Thomas Duncansons, Robert de Athale, Andrew Macnayr, Duncan
Bryceson, Angus Macnayr, and John Ayson junior, and all others their
adherents; and as taking part with them in the slaughter, Slurach and
his brothers, with the whole Clanqwhevil, William Mowat, John de Cowts,
Donald de Cowts, with their adherents; David de Rose, Alexander
M‘Kintalyhur, John M‘Kintalyhur, Adam Rolson, John Rolson, with their
adherents; Duncan Neteraulde, John Mathyson, with their adherents;
Morgownde Ruryson and Michael Mathowson, with their adherents.[436] They
thus formed six groups. The first group who were directly implicated,
with the exception of the Stewarts, belong to Athole; the Duncansons,
with Robert de Athale, were the heads of the Clan Donnachie, descended
from the old earls who possessed the north-western district bordering
upon that of Badenoch; the Macnairs possessed Foss in Strathtummel, and
the Aysons, Tullimet in Strathtay. The other five were art and part. The
first were Slurach and his brothers, who with their followers formed a
clan termed the Clanqwhevil. This is the first appearance of a distinct
clan in the Highlands. The second group of the Mowats and Cowts belonged
to Buchan, of which Alexander Stewart was earl; and the third of David
de Rose and his followers, must have come from Strathnairn, where the
Roses were situated. These groups were, therefore, probably dependants
of the Wolf of Badenoch, and the cause of this raid seems to have arisen
from this, that Sir David de Lindsay had inherited Glenesk in Angus and
the district of Strathnairn from his mother, one of the daughters and
co-heirs of Sir John Stirling of Glenesk, while another of the daughters
had married Robert de Atholia. His possession of Strathnairn would bring
him into contact with the Wolf of Badenoch and the northern clans, and a
quarrel regarding the succession probably brought the Clan Donnachie
into the field.

[Sidenote: Combat of two clans on North Inch of Perth in 1396.]

The Wolf of Badenoch died in 1394, and two years after, the only
Highland clan hitherto mentioned with that designation, came more
prominently into the foreground in the very remarkable combat which took
place on the North Inch of Perth in the year 1396, and from its
peculiarity seems to have attracted general notice, as well as given
rise to a controversy with regard to the actors in it, for which it is
difficult to provide any satisfactory solution.

The account given by the chroniclers of this remarkable combat differs
somewhat as to the details. The earliest account of it is probably that
given by Wyntoun, who wrote his Chronicle between 1420 and 1424, or only
about twenty-five years after the event. He says that the combat took
place at Saint Johnstoun or Perth between sixty men, thirty against
thirty, who belonged to two clans who had been at variance in old feud
in which their fore elders were slain. He names the clans Clahynnhe (or
Clan) Qwhewyl, and Clachiny (or Clan) Ha, and that their chieftains were
Scha Ferqwhareisone and Christy Johnesone; that they fought within
barriers with bow and axe, knife and sword; but that who had the best of
it he could not say, and that fifty or more were slain, and but few
escaped with life.[437]

Bower, who wrote nearly twenty-five years later, gives further details.
He says that a great part of the north beyond the Grampians had been
disturbed by two turbulent caterans and their followers:—Scheabeg and
his kin, who were called Clan Kay, and Cristi Johnson, and his, called
Clanquhele, who could by no treaty or arrangement be brought to peace,
nor could they be brought under subjection to the government, upon which
David de Lyndesay of Crawford, and Thomas earl of Moray, interposed and
treated between them, so that they agreed to settle their quarrel before
the king at Perth, by a combat between thirty chosen men of their kin on
each side, armed only with their swords, bows and arrows, and without
their plaids or other arms. The combat took place on the North Inch of
Perth, in presence of the king, the governor, and a great multitude, on
the Monday before Saint Michael’s day, when, of the sixty, all were
slain except one on the part of the Clan Kay and eleven on the other
part. He adds that as they were entering within the barrier, one of the
number dashed into the river and escaped by swimming across, on which
one of the spectators offered to supply his place for half a mark, on
condition that if he survived he was to be maintained during the rest of
his life, which was agreed to. The result was that the north was for
many years after at peace, and there was no further outbreak of the
caterans.[438] The material difference between Bower’s account and
Wyntoun’s is, that he reverses the connection of the chiefs with the
clans, and adds the detail of the numbers slain on both sides, and the
aid of the volunteer.

The next account is given by Maurice Buchanan, in the Book of
Pluscarden, who wrote in 1461, and differs very much from that of Bower.
He connects this event with the raid into Angus five years previously,
and implies that the same parties were concerned in both, but he does
not name the clans. This was so far the case, that the Clan Qwhele took
part in both. He says that in 1391 so great a contention had arisen
among the wild Scots (_silvestres Scottos_), that their whole country
was disturbed by it, and, on that account, the king finding himself
unable to restore peace, arranged, in a council of the magnates of the
kingdom, that their two principal captains, with their best and most
valiant friends, amounting on each side to thirty men, should fight in
an enclosed field after the manner of judicial combatants (_more
duellancium_),[439] with swords only, cross bows having each three
arrows only, and this before the king on a certain day on the North Inch
of Perth; and this, by the intervention of the earl of Crawford and
other nobles, was agreed upon and carried out, when all on both sides
were slain except seven, five on the one side and two on the other
escaping alive, of which two one escaped by flying to the river and
escaping across it, and the other being taken was pardoned with the
consent of the other party, though some say that he was hung. In the
beginning of the conflict one of the number of one party disappeared and
could not be found, on which one of the spectators, who happened to
belong to the same clan (_parentela_) and was hostile to the other
party, agreed to supply his place for forty shillings, fought most
valiantly, and escaped with his life.[440] As the writer of this account
was himself a Highlander, this is most probably the account given of the
combat on the Highland side, while that of Bower was the account
reported in the Lowlands; and the former has more appearance of being
the correct account, and agrees better with that of Wyntoun, who could
not tell which party gained. It also indicates that the conflict was of
the nature of a judicial wager of battle, which is also probably the
true view; for if the contention between the clans was a mere ordinary
feud, it is difficult to see how this combat should have been the means
of restoring peace, but if the dispute related to some difference as to
some question of right or privilege which both claimed, it is quite
intelligible that it should have been settled by judicial combat before
the king.

The only other early notice of this event is in a short chronicle
contained in the Chartulary of Moray, which states that the combat took
place on the 28th day of September at Perth before the king and the
nobles of Scotland, because he found it impossible to establish peace
between two clans (_parentelas_) called the Clan Kay and the Clan
Qwhwle, whence there were daily slaughtering attacks committed by them.
Thirty men on each side without armour, but with bows, swords, and
dirks, met in conflict, when all on the side of the Clan Kay were slain
except one, and of the other party ten survived.[441]

[Sidenote: The Clan Chattan and Clan Cameron.]

If this event was connected with the raid of Angus which preceded it,
the events which followed may likewise tend to throw light upon the
actors in this strange combat. When the royal forces attacked Alexander,
Lord of the Isles, in 1429, and put him to flight in Lochaber, the
chroniclers tell us, that at the sight of the royal standard, he was
deserted by two tribes, who submitted to the royal authority. They are
termed by Bower the Clan Katan and Clan Cameron, and by Maurice
Buchanan, more correctly, the _Clan de Guyllequhatan_ and _Clan
Cameron_. This was on the eve of St. John the Baptist’s day, that is, on
the 23d of June, and on the following Palm Sunday, which is on the 20th
day of the following month of March, we are told by the chroniclers that
the Clan Chattan attacked the Clan Cameron when assembled in a certain
church, to which they set fire and destroyed nearly the whole clan.
Although the Clan Chattan are here said, in general terms, to have
deserted the Lord of the Isles, it appears that a part of the clan still
adhered to his cause, for after his restoration to liberty, we find him
in 1443 granting a charter to Malcolm MacIntosh of the forty merk lands
of Keppoch and others in the lordship of Lochaber, and in 1447 he
confers upon him the office of bailie or steward of the lordship of
Lochaber.[442] This Malcolm, who is called in the second charter his
cousin, was related to the Lord of the Isles through his mother, who was
a daughter of his grandfather Angus, Lord of the Isles, and was thus
probably led to adhere to him. The same lands are confirmed to his son
Duncan MacIntosh in 1466, by John, Lord of the Isles,[443] and in this
charter he is termed Captain of Clan Chattan, which is the first
appearance of this designation.

Neither were the Clan Cameron entirely destroyed, for we find Alan, son
of Donald Duff, appearing in 1472 as Captain of the Clan Cameron, and in
1492, Alexander of the Isles, Lord of Lochalsh and Lochiel, grants the
lands of Lochiel to Ewen, son of Alan, son of Donald, Captain of Clan
Cameron. It would thus appear that a part only of these two clans had
deserted the Lord of the Isles in 1429, and a part adhered to him, that
the conflict on Palm Sunday was between the former part of these clans,
and that the leaders of those who adhered to the Lord of the Isles
became afterwards recognised as captains of the respective clans. It
further appears that there was, within no distant time after the
conflict on the North Inch of Perth, a bitter feud between the two clans
who had deserted the Lord of the Isles, and there are indications that
this was merely the renewal of an older quarrel, for both clans
undoubtedly contested the right to the lands of Glenlui and Locharkaig
in Lochaber, to which William MacIntosh received a charter from the Lord
of the Isles in 1336, while they unquestionably afterwards formed a part
of the territory possessed by the Camerons.

By the later historians one of the clans who fought on the North Inch of
Perth, and who were termed by the earlier chroniclers _Clan Qwhele_, are
identified with the Clan Chattan,[444] and that this identification is
well founded, so far as regards that part of the clan which adhered to
the royal cause, while that in the part of the Clan Cameron who followed
the same course, and were nearly entirely destroyed on Palm Sunday, we
may recognise their opponents the Clan Kay, is not without much
probability.

The Clan Chattan in later times consisted of sixteen septs, who followed
MacIntosh as captain of the clan, but did not recognise him as one of
the race, and regarded MacPherson of Cluny, head of the sept called
_Clan Vuireach_, as the male representative of the founder of the clan.
The first of the MacIntoshes who appears with the title of Captain of
Clan Chattan is Duncan MacIntosh, the son of Malcolm, in 1400 and in
1466, and he was probably placed by the Lord of the Isles over that part
of the clan who adhered to him. Eight of the septs forming the later
Clan Chattan may be put aside as having been affiliated to the clan
subsequently to the year 1429, as well as the family of MacIntosh,
descended from Malcolm. The remainder represent the clan as it existed
before that date. It consisted of an older sept of MacIntoshes, who
possessed lands in Badenoch, the principal of which was Rothiemurchus,
and appears to have claimed those of Glenlui and Locharkaig in Lochaber.
The eight septs who then formed the Clan Chattan proper were the _Clan
Vuirich_ or MacPhersons, and the _Clan Day_ or Davidsons, who were
called the old Clan Chattan, and six stranger septs, who took protection
from the clan. These were the _Clan Vic Ghillevray_ or MacGillivrays,
the _Clan Vean_ or MacBeans, the _Clan Vic Govies_, the _Clan Tarrel_,
the _Clan Cheanduy_, and the _Sliochd Gowchruim_ or Smiths. The _Clan
Vic Govies_, however, were a branch of the Clan Cameron, and the
_Sliochd Gowchruim_ were believed to be descendants of the person who
supplied the place of the missing member of the clan at the combat on
the North Inch of Perth, and who was said to have been a smith.

The Clan Cameron, on the other hand, consisted of four septs. These were
the _Clan Gillanfhaigh_ or Gillonie, or Camerons of Invermalie and
Strone, the _Clan Soirlie_, or Camerons of Glenevis, the _Clan Vic
Mhartain_, or MacMartins of Letterfinlay, and the Camerons of Lochiel.
The latter were the sept whose head became Captain of Clan Cameron and
adhered to the Lord of the Isles, while the three former represented the
part of the clan who seceded from him in 1429. Besides these there were
dependent septs, the chief of which were the _Clan Vic Gilveil_ or
M‘Millans, and these were believed to be of the race of Clan Chattan.
The connection between the two clans is thus apparent. Now there are
preserved genealogies of both clans in their earlier forms, written not
long after the year 1429. One is termed the ‘Genealogy of the Clan an
Toisig, that is, the Clan Gillachattan,’ and gives it in two separate
lines. The first represented the older MacIntoshes. The second is
deduced from Gillachattan Mor, the eponymus of the clan. His
great-grandson Muireach, from whom the Clan Vuireach takes its name, has
a son Domnall or Donald, called _in Caimgilla_, and this word when
aspirated would form the name Kevil or _Quhevil_.[445] The chief seat of
this branch of the clan can also be ascertained, for Alexander, Lord of
the Isles and Earl of Ross, confirms a charter granted by William, earl
of Ross, in 1338 of the lands of Dalnafert and Kinrorayth or Kinrara,
under reservation of one acre of ground near the Stychan of the town of
Dalnavert, where was situated the manor of the late Scayth, son of
Ferchard,[446] and we find a ‘_Tsead_, son of Ferquhar’ in the Genealogy
at the same period. Moreover the grandson of this Scayth was _Disiab_ or
Shaw, who thus was contemporary with the Shaw who fought in 1396. The
gravestone said to mark the grave of Shaw _Corshiacloch_, or
buck-toothed, whom tradition declares to be the Shaw who led the clan at
the combat, was, according to Shaw, still to be seen in the adjacent
church of Rothiemurchus. He is also said to have married the daughter of
Kenneth Macvuireach, ancestor of the Macpherson of Cluny, and in him and
his father-in-law we may probably recognise the ‘Kenethus Mor with his
son-in-law, leader of two thousand men,’ who were arrested by James the
First at his Parliament at Inverness in 1427.[447] With regard to the
Clan Cameron, the invariable tradition is that the head of the
MacGillonies or _MacGillaanaigh_ led the clan who fought with the Clan
Chattan during the long feud between them, and the old Genealogy terms
the Cameron’s _Clan Maelanfhaigh_, or the race of the servant of the
prophet, and deduces them from a common ancestor the _Clan Maelanfhaigh_
and the _Clan Camshron_, and as the epithet _an Caimgilla_, when
aspirated, would become _Kevil_, so the word _Fhaigh_ in its aspirated
form would be represented by the _Hay_ of the chroniclers.[448]

John Major probably gives the clew to the whole transaction, when he
tells us that ‘these two clans’—the Clan Chattan and Clan Cameron, which
we have seen had a certain connection through their dependent septs,
‘were of one blood, having but little in lordships, but following one
head of their race as principal with their kinsmen and dependants.’[449]
He is apparently describing their position before these dissensions
broke out between them, and his description refers us back to the period
when the two clans formed one tribe, possessing the district of Lochaber
as their _Tuath_ or country, where the lands in dispute—Glenlui and
Locharkaig—were probably the official demesne of the old _Toisech_ or
head of the tribe.

[Sidenote: The Chief and the Kinsmen.]

The clans are here described as consisting of two divisions: The one of
the Kinsmen, or those of the blood of the sept; the other of the
dependants or subordinate septs, who might be of different race. The
former clan are well defined in the Gartmore MS., written in the year
1747. The writer says that ‘the property of these Highlands belongs to a
great many different persons, who are more or less considerable in
proportion to the extent of their estates, and to the command of men
that live upon them, or follow them, on account of this clanship, out of
the estates of others. These lands are set by the landlord during
pleasure, or a short tack, to people whom they call goodmen (_Duine
Uasail_), and who are of a superior station to the commonalty. These are
generally the sons, brothers, cousins, or nearest relations of the
landlord (or chief). This, by means of a small portion, and the
liberality of their relations, they are able to stock, and which they,
their children and grandchildren, possess at an easy rent, till a nearer
descendant be again preferred to it. As the propinquity removes, they
become less considered, till at last they degenerate to be of the common
people, unless some accidental acquisition of wealth supports them above
their station. As this hath been an ancient custom, most of the farmers
and cottars are of the name and clan of the proprietor.’ This exactly
describes the Irish _Finé_ in its restricted sense, where the immediate
kin of the _Ceannfiné_ or chief consists of seventeen persons, forming
the _Duthach Finé_, from whence they pass by degrees into the _Duthaign
Daine_ or commonalty of the _Finé_ or sept.

[Sidenote: The native-men.]

The dependent septs, on the other hand, represent the _Fuidhir_ of the
Irish tribal system. Their position will be best understood by the Bonds
of Manrent or Manred, which came to be taken by the chiefs from their
dependants when the relation constituted by usage and traditional custom
was relaxed by time, or when a new relationship was constituted at a
later period. Thus in a bond by a sept of M‘Gillikeyr to John Campbell
of Glenurchy, in 1547, he declares that they have chosen him of their
own free motive to their chief to be their protector in all great
actions, as a chief does in the countries of the Highlands, and shall
have lands of him in assedation; and when any of them deceases shall
leave to him and his heirs ‘ane cawlpe of kenkynie,’ as is used in the
countries about. Again, in a bond by Duncan M‘Olcallum and others of the
Clan Teir to Colyne Campbell of Glenurchay in 1556, they state that in
consequence of the slaughter of Johne M‘Gillenlay, foster-brother of Sir
Colyne Campbell of Glenurchay, their predecessor, for sythment and
recompence of said slaughter, had delivered to him one of the principal
committers of it called John Roy M‘Ynteir, to be punished at his will;
and moreover had elected and taken him and his heirs for their chiefs
and masters, and given to him their calps, which calps the said Colyne,
Sir Duncan Campbell of Glenurchay, his son that deceased at Flodden
(1513), and all other lairds of Glenurchay had since taken up; and the
said Clan Teir of new ratify the bond in favour of Colyne, now of
Glenurchay. Again, we find in 1559 Archibald, earl of Argyll,
transferring to his cousin Colyne Campbell of Glenurchay and his
heirs-male the manrent, homage, and service which his predecessors and
he had and has of the ‘haill kyn and surname of the Clanlaurane and
their posteritie,’ together with the uptaking of their calps, providing
the said Colyne obtain their consent thereto.[450]

It is unnecessary to quote more of these bonds, which are usually in the
same terms; and we may conclude with the following taken from ‘ane list
of the native-men of Craignish.’ In 1592 Malcolme Moir Makesaig and his
sons appeared at Barrichbyan, and gave to their well-beloved Ronald
Campbell McEan VcDonald of Barrichbyan and his heirs their bond of
manred and calpis for ever, and shall follow and obey him and his heirs
in whatever place he and his foresaids transport themselves in the
country or without; and shall obey them as native-men ought and should
do to their chief; and Ronald obliges himself and his heirs to be a good
chief and master to them as his native-men, and to give to them their
duty that they and their succession of men and women ought to have after
calpis, conform to the use of the country. In 1595 similar agreements
were made by other small septs, and in a bond of manrent granted by
Gillicallum McDonchie VcIntyre VcCoshen to Ranald Campbell of
Barrechebyan in 1612, in which he states, ‘Forasmuch as I understand of
gude memorie that the surname of Clanntyre VcCoshen wer of auld
native-men, servandis and dependaris to the house and surename of
Clandule Cregnis, _alias_ Campbellis in Cregnis, and willing of my
dewtie to renew the band and service of my sadis forbearis war of auld,
and dewtie to the sadis house and surename, and acknowledging Rannald
Campbell of Barrichbyan to be of the samin house and surname,’ he
becomes bound, for himself and all others descended of his body, ‘to be
leill, trew, and of auld, native-men in all lawlieness and subjection to
the said Rannald and his airis-male for ever, and that according as my
predecessors were in use of befoir, and as ony native-men are in use in
Argyll, in special sall serve be sea and land the said Rannald, etc.;
and in token to uplift from me at my decease the second but aucht that I
sall have at the time foresaid in name of calp, to wit, ane hors, meir,
or mart;’ and ‘providing alwayis the said Rannald and his airis do the
dewtie of ane chief or maister to me and my airis male and female, as
use is; attour I grant me, as use is, to haif gotten at the making
heirof ane guid and sufficient sword, ressavit and deliverit be the said
Rannald to remane as ane memoriall taikin of this my band of
manrent.’[451]

[Sidenote: Fosterage.]

Another feature in the relation between the chief and his kinsmen with
their dependent septs was the custom of fosterage which prevailed among
the Highland clans as it characterised the Irish tribes. The written
contracts of fosterage, which, like the bonds of manrent, superseded the
unwritten usage during the transition period when the older Celtic law
was losing its influence, and when it became necessary for the chiefs to
secure their ancient privileges from passing away under the pressure of
other influences, will afford us the best means of ascertaining the true
nature of this custom. We may refer to the terms of a few of those which
have been preserved. In 1510 we have an obligation by Johne M‘Neill
Vreik in Stronferna, and Gregoure his brother, to receive Coleyne
Campbell, lawful third son to Coleyne Campbell, the eldest son and heir
of Sir Duncan Campbell of Glenurquhay, knight, in fostering, and to give
him a bairn’s part of gear; and giving to the said Sir Duncan and his
heirs their bonds of _Manrent_ and _Calps_, that is, the best aucht in
their houses the times of their decease; the said Sir Duncan and Coleyne
his son being bound to defend the said John and Gregour in the lands of
Stronferna, and the rest of the _rowmis_ they possess, as law will.[452]
Again, in 1580, there is a contract between Duncane Campbell, fiar of
Glenurquhay, and his native servant Gillecreist Makdonchy Duff V^cNokerd
and Katherine Neyn Douill Vekconchy his spouse, in which the latter bind
themselves to take in fostering Duncane Campbell, son to the said
Duncane, to be sustained by them in meat, drink, and nourishment till he
be sent to the schools with the advice of friends, and to sustain him at
the schools with reasonable support, the said father and foster-father
giving between them of _Makhelve_ goods in donation to the said bairn at
Beltane thereafter, the value of two hundred merks of ky and two horses
or two mares worth forty merks; these goods, with their increase, to
pertain to the said bairn as his own chance bears him to, but their milk
to pertain to the said foster-father and mother so long as they sustain
the said bairn, and until he be sent to the schools, except so much of
the milk as will pay the mails of pasture-lands for the said cattle,
which the said foster-father is bound to find for them upon Lochaw, and
until such be got he finding for them the half of the lands of
Auchakynnay, etc.[453]

The next contract in date, which we shall quote, takes us to the Western
Isles. It is a contract in 1612, by which Sir Roderick Macleod of
Dunvegan gives his son Norman to John, son of the son of Kenneth, to
foster; and it is a very remarkable document, for it is written in
Gaelic in the Irish character of the time. The conditions are, that if
John dies first the child is to remain with the widow, but the
guardianship with John’s brother Angus, who is to have the entire charge
of the child if the widow marries again; and Sir Roderick is to have a
son’s share of the stock (the bairn’s part of the other contracts)
during the life of himself and his heir and the foster-child, along with
John’s heirs. The stock (_Sealbh_) which is to be put into possession of
the foster-child is four mares given by the foster-father, and other
four mares by the father Sir Roderick, along with three which he
promised him when he took him to his bosom. The charge and keeping of
the seven mares given by the father to be with the foster-father, in
order to put them to increase for his foster-son; and the care and
keeping of the four mares given by the foster-father to be with the
father, to put them to increase for him in like manner. Among the
witnesses to this contract are the ministers of Duirinish and
Bracadale.[454] The last we shall notice is as late as the year 1665,
and is a contract betwixt George Campbell of Airds in Argyllshire and
Donald Dow M‘Ewin in Ardmastill and Roiss N’Odochardie his wife, by
which George Campbell gives in fostering to Donald Dow and his wife,
Isobell Campbell, his lawful daughter, for the space of seven years from
next Beltane, and gives to her as M‘Heliff (_Shealbh_) two new-calved
kyne with a calf and a year-old stirk, a two-year-old quey at Beltane
next, and another two-year-old quey at Beltane 1667; and Donald Dow and
his spouse give to their foster-child two farrow kyne, with a stirk and
a two-year-old quey at Beltane, and another two-year-old quey at Beltane
1667. The whole of their cattle with their increase to be in the custody
of the foster-father and mother during these seven years, the milk to
belong to the foster-father and the increase of the cattle to the
foster-child; but the father is to grass the yeald kyne yearly, if the
foster-father have not sufficient pasturage for them. In addition to
this, the foster-father and his spouse give the foster-child a bairn’s
part and portion of their whole goods and gear which shall belong to
them at their decease, as if she was their own lawful child.[455]

[Sidenote: The Clan and its Members.]

While the clan, viewed as a single community, thus consisted of the
chief, with his kinsmen to a certain limited degree of relationship; the
commonalty who were of the same blood, who all bore the same name, and
his dependants, consisting of subordinate septs of native-men, who did
not claim to be of the blood of the chief, but were either probably
descended from the more ancient occupiers of the soil, or were broken
men from other clans, who had taken protection from him, the influence
of the acquisition of the right of property in land, which had
originally developed the septs out of the tribe, likewise tended to make
smaller septs within the clan. Those kinsmen of the chief who acquired
the property of their land founded families, in which the land became
hereditary, and which thus became the centres of a new organisation
within the clan. The most influential of these was that of the oldest
cadet in the family which had been longest separated from the main stem,
and usually presented the appearance of a rival house little less
powerful than that of the chief. There is perhaps no better description
of the form which the clan ultimately assumed, and of the spirit which
animated its members, than that given by an acute observer in the early
part of last century.[456] ‘The Highlanders,’ he says, ‘are divided into
tribes or clans, under chiefs or chieftains, as they are called in the
laws of Scotland; and each clan again divided into branches from the
main stock, who have chieftains over them. These are subdivided into
smaller branches of fifty or sixty men, who deduce their original from
their particular chieftains, and rely upon them as their more immediate
protectors and defenders. The ordinary Highlanders esteem it the most
sublime degree of virtue to love their chief and pay him a blind
obedience, although it be in opposition to the government, the laws of
the kingdom, or even to the law of God. Next to this love of their chief
is that of the particular branch from whence they sprang, and, in a
third degree, to those of the whole clan or name, whom they will assist,
right or wrong, against those of any other tribe with which they are at
variance. They likewise owe goodwill to such clans as they esteem to be
their particular well-wishers; and, lastly, they have an adherence one
to another as Highlanders in opposition to the people of the Low
Country, whom they despise as inferior to them in courage, and believe
they have a right to plunder them whenever it is in their power. This
last arises from a tradition that the Lowlands, in old times, were the
possession of their ancestors. The chief exercises an arbitrary
authority over his vassals, determines all differences and disputes that
happen among them, and levies taxes upon extraordinary occasions, such
as the marriage of a daughter, building a house, or some pretence for
his support and the honour of the name. This power of the chiefs is not
supported by interest as they are landlords, but as lineally descended
from the old patriarchs or fathers of the families.’




                              CHAPTER IX.

                    THE CLANS AND THEIR GENEALOGIES.


[Sidenote: State of the Highlands in the sixteenth century.]

The forfeiture of the last Lord of the Isles, and the annexation of a
great part of his territories to the crown, finally brought the whole
clans of the Highlands and Islands into direct subjection to the royal
authority, but the removal of the old hereditary rulers of the
provinces, and the substitution of a central authority which could make
itself but little felt beyond the Highland Line, left the clans without
any practical control, and the sixteenth century is mainly characterised
by internal conflicts between the clans themselves, which increased the
power of some, and broke up the solidarity of others, and by the gradual
advance in influence and extent of territory in Argyllshire of the
Campbells, whose astuteness and foresight led them to a uniform support
of the royal authority, while the Mackenzies acquired a hardly less
influential position in Ross-shire.[457]

From the early part of the fifteenth century, when Donald of the Isles
had invaded the Low Country at the head of a Highland army of ten
thousand men, till the outbreak of the civil war in the reign of Charles
the First, the clans had never broken through the barriers which
separated them from the Lowlands in the form of one united army; and it
was not till Montrose raised the Highland clans to make a diversion in
favour of the king in the north that their power as a united people was
at all recognised. The rapid and brilliant campaigns of Montrose showed
what the clans were capable of effecting when brought together and
skilfully handled, though opposed by all the power and influence of
Gillespie Gruamach, the Earl of Argyll and head of the Campbells. The
normal relation of the Highlanders and Lowlanders to each other is
graphically put by one of the greatest of modern writers, who was
thoroughly acquainted with the subject, when he says, ‘The inhabitants
of the Lowlands were indeed aware that there existed, in the extremity
of the island, amid wilder mountains and broader lakes than their own,
tribes of men called clans, living each under the rule of their own
chief, wearing a peculiar dress, speaking an unknown language, and going
armed even in the most ordinary and peaceable vocations. The more
southern counties saw specimens of these men following the droves of
cattle which were the sole exportable commodity of their country,
plaided, bonneted, belted, and brogued, and driving their bullocks, as
Virgil is said to have spread his manure, with an air of great dignity
and consequence.[458] To their nearer Lowland neighbours they were known
by more fierce and frequent causes of acquaintance; by the forays which
they made upon the inhabitants of the plains, and the tribute, or
protection-money, which they exacted from those whose possessions they
spared.’[459]

[Sidenote: Names and position of the clans.]

Repeated attempts were made by the kings to control the turbulence of
the clans, and to bring them under more complete subjection to the
government, but it was not till the reign of James that a serious effort
was made by Parliament to effect this, when three very important Acts
were passed, which put us in possession of detailed information as to
the number and names of the clans at the time. In 1587 an Act was passed
‘for the quieting and keeping in obedience of the disorderit subjectis
inhabitants of the Borders, Highlands and Isles.’ It is unnecessary to
enter into any detail as to the description given in this Act of the
state of these parts of the country, which is sufficiently highly
coloured, and of the remedies proposed by the statute; but annexed to it
are two rolls—one ‘of the names of the Landlords and Baillies of lands
dwelling on the Borders and in the Highlands where broken men has dwelt
and presently dwells;’ and the other, ‘of the Clans that have Captains,
Chiefs, and Chieftains, on whom they depend ofttimes against the will of
their Landlords, as well on the Borders as the Highlands, and of some
special persons of branches of the said clans.’[460] Here the landlord
or feudal overlord is distinguished from the captain, chief, and
chieftain, or tribal head of the clan, both characters being sometimes
united in the same person, and at other times vested in different
persons. Neither are the titles of captain, chief, and chieftain
synonymous. The captain was the person who actually led the clan,
whether representing the founder of the clan in the male line or not,
while the chief was the _Ceanncine_, or hereditary head of the tribe,
who possessed that character, and the chieftain, the _Ceanntighe_, or
head of a subordinate sept. The chief was usually also the captain, but
when he was either set aside from incapacity, or the pre-eminent
military and administrative talents of a member of the clan led to the
tribe taking the unusual course of adopting him to be their leader, as
better able to protect them, he was simply termed Captain of the Clan,
and the position and title usually remained with his descendants,
especially if he had obtained a feudal title to the lands.[461] The
whole of the clan, however, seldom acquiesced in the adoption of a
leader separate from the hereditary chief, and in every clan where the
actual head of it bore the title of Captain we find a controversy as to
the right to the chiefship, and a part of the clan holding off from the
rest.[462]

Another statute was passed in 1594 ‘for punishment of thift, reif,
oppression, and sorning.’[463] It contains within it a list of clans and
surnames inhabiting the Highlands and Isles, and likewise a list of
broken men of surnames inhabiting the sheriffdoms of Argyll, Bute,
Dumbarton, Stirling, Perth, Forfar, Aberdeen, Banff, Elgin, Forres,
Nairn, Inverness, and Cromarty; and stewartries of Stratherne and
Menteith. These lists of clans and broken men, with a list furnished by
MacVureach of the clans who joined Montrose, gives us a tolerably
complete view of the state of the Highland clans at the time, and they
may be thus stated, following the order of the districts which they
inhabited.

The Highland district of the earldom of Lennox was occupied by the Clan
Pharlane, undoubted descendants of the old earls of Lennox. The clan
takes its name from Parlane or Bartholomew, a great-grandson of
Gilchrist, third son of Alain, earl of Lennox, and the steps of the
pedigree rest upon charter evidence. Next to them were the Clan Gregor,
on the east side of Lochlomond and around Loch Katrine. In Balquhidder
we find the Clan _Labhran_ or Lauren, and in Atholl the clan possessing
the largest territory was the Clan Donnachie, whose descent from Duncan,
son of Andrew de Atholia, likewise rests upon charter evidence, and
whose name of De Atholia sufficiently indicates that they were the male
representatives of the old earls of Atholl. With Glenshee and Glenisla
is connected a clan called the Clan M‘Thomas. Crossing the Mounth we
find the Highland districts of Mar and Buchan occupied by the Clan
Chattan, who likewise, with their branches and dependent septs, extended
over Strathdearn, Strathnairn, and Badenoch, into the district of
Lochaber. In Ross-shire were the Clan Andres or Rosses and the Clan
Kenneth or Mackenzies, and in the Highland districts of Sutherland and
Caithness, forming the north-west corner of Scotland, were the Clan
Morgan or Mackays and the Clan Gunn. The clans which occupied the
principal position in the great district of Argyll and the Isles were
the different clans into which the descendants of the powerful Lords of
the Isles and Knights of Argyll broke up on the termination of the main
line. There were the Clann _Dubhgal_ or Macdougalls of Lorne, descended
from Dubhgal, the eldest son of Somerled; the Clandonald descended from
Domnall, son of Reginald or Ranald, his second son; and this great sept
was again broken up into six clans. These were the Clandonald north and
south, that is, the Clan _Hustain_ or MacDonalds of Slate, and the Clan
_Eoin Mor_ or MacConnells of Isla and Kintyre, descended from Donald,
eldest son of John, Lord of the Isles, by the king’s daughter, and from
Eoin Mor, his second son, respectively. From Ranald, son of Alaster, his
third son, sprang the Clanranald of Lochaber, or Macdonalds of Keppoch.
From _Eoin Sprangaigh_ and Alaster Og, sons of Angus Mor, came the Clan
_Ian_ or MacIans of Ardnamurchan, and the Clan _Alaster_ or MacAlasters
of Loup in Kintyre. The most important clans after the Macdonalds were,
in Argyll, the Clan _O’Duibhn_ or Campbells, whose original seat was the
district of Lochow and Ardskeodnich, and who succeeded to their power.
In the Isles the Clan Leod or Macleods of Dunvegan and Glenelg, and
those of Lewis, descended from two brothers, were the most powerful; and
next them the Clan _Gilleoin_ or Macleans of Dowart and Lochbowie, and
the Clan _Neill_ or Macneills of Gigha and of Barra, and here we see the
oldest cadets occupying quite as prominent a position as the main line.
The other clans of Argyll and the Isles were, in Cowall, the Clan
Lachlan, and the Clan _Ladmann_ or Lamont, and between Loch Fine and
Lochow the Clan _Neachtan_ or MacNaughtons; while Glenorchy was the
original seat of the Clan Gregor, and in Lochaber the _Clanchamron_, or
Camerons of Lochiel, had their home. In Lochaber and Colonsay were the
Clan _Dubhsithé_ or Macduffies, and in Mull and Skye the Clan _Fingaine_
or Mackinnons and the Clan _Guaire_ or Macquarries.

[Sidenote: Meaning of Clann, and the personal names from which their
           patronymics were taken.]

This word Clann signifies simply children or descendants, and the clan
name thus implies that the members of it are or were supposed to be
descended from a common ancestor or eponymus, and they were
distinguished from each other by their patronymics, the use of surnames
in the proper sense of the term being unknown among them. These
patronymics, in the case of the _Ceannciné_ or chief and the
_Ceanntighs_ or heads of the smaller septs, indicated their descent from
the founder of the race or sept; those of the members of it who were of
the kin of the chief or chieftain showed the personal relation; while
the commonalty of the clan simple used a derivative form of the name of
the clan, implying merely that they belonged to it. This system is
quaintly described by John Elder, clerk, in his letter to King Henry the
Eighth in 1542 or 1543. He says—‘Now and pleas your excellent Majestie,
the said people which inhabitede Scotland afore the incummyng of the
said Albanactus (as I have said), being valiant, stronge, and
couragious, although they were savage and wilde, had strange names, as
_Morrdhow_ .i. Mordachus; _Gillicallum_ .i. Malcolmus; _Donyll_ \.i.
Donaldus, and so fourth. Then their sonnis followinge theame in manheid
and valianntnes, called theameselves after this manner of wyse, leaving
their proper names unexpressede, _Makconyll_ .i. filius Donaldi;
_Makgillecallum_ .i. filius Malcolmi, etc., and so they have contenewide
unto this daye.’[464] Thus the head of the whole Clan Donald was simply
Macdonald, the chief of the Clan Ranald of Glengarry, _Macmhicalastair_,
the captain of Clan Ranald, _Macmhicalain_, and one of the commonalty
simply _Domnaillach_ or a Macdonald. Besides the clans the statutes
distinguish what they term surnames. There were in Lennox, Buchanans,
_M‘Cawlis_ or Macaulays, and Galbraiths; Grahames in Monteith; Stewarts
in Atholl, Lorne, and Balquhidder; Menzieses, Fergusons, Spaldings, and
MacIntoshes in Atholl; Farquharsons in Braemar; MacPhersons in
Strathnairn; Grants in Strathspey; Frasers in the Aird; Rosses and
Monros in Ross; and Neilsons in Sutherland. These surnames were of three
kinds. There were first names which had a Gaelic form, as Macaulay and
Macpherson; or the English equivalent of a Gaelic form, as Farquharson,
Ferguson, etc.; secondly, those who had assumed a territorial name, or
whose name bore that appearance, as the Buchanans, who likewise bore the
name of _Macaustelan_, and took the former designation from their lands,
Grants, Rosses, and Monroes; and thirdly, those which were foreign names
and of foreign descent, but who had become so assimilated to the Gaelic
people as to be identified with them in language, custom, and spirit of
clanship, as the Stewarts, Frasers, Menzieses, Spaldings, etc., who had
been long settled in the Highlands.

The system of nomenclature, therefore, which characterised the clans and
the surnames of Gaelic origin was one entirely based upon the personal
name, and was in no respect territorial; but we find, on examination,
that the personal names used by the Gaelic people were of different
kinds, and constituted upon different principles. The earliest personal
names used by the different branches of the Celtic people appear to have
been formed in the same manner, and resemble each other in their
structure. On analysing those both of the Cymric and the Gaelic people,
we can see that they are compounded of two monosyllables, a certain
number of which is used to form the first half of the name and a
different set of monosyllables annexed as a termination, and these are
combined with each other in every variety of form. The initial syllables
are more numerous than the terminal, and it will only be necessary to
specify a few to illustrate the formation of these names. Thus in Welsh,
_Ael_, _Aer_, _Arth_, _Cad_, and _Cyn_ are common initial syllables; and
_Teyrn_, _March_, _Gwyr_, and _Gwys_ common terminations. These form in
combination the names _Aelgyvarch_, _Cadvarch_, _Cynvarch_, _Aerdeyrn_,
_Cyndeyrn_, _Arthwyl_, _Cynwys_, etc. So in Gaelic _Aen_, _Art_, _Con_,
_Dun_, _Dubh_, _Fear_, _Fin_, and _Gorm_ are common initial syllables;
and _Gal_[465] and _Gus_, common terminations, and from them are formed
_Aengal_, _Artgal_, _Congal_, _Dungal_, _Dubhgal_, _Feargal_, _Fingal_,
_Gormgal_, and _Aengus_, _Congus_, _Feargus_, etc. Similar forms existed
among the Pictish names, as in _Ungust_, _Urgust_, _Urgart_, _Dergart_,
_Gartnaidh_, etc.; and besides the Pictish forms which are analogous to
the Irish, we find such Pictish names as _Neachtain_, _Fingaine_, etc.,
occurring in the Highland Genealogies.

The introduction of Christianity among these Gaelic tribes added another
class of names to these older forms. These were formed by prefixing the
words _Maol_, that is, bald in the sense of tonsured, and _Giolla_, or
servant, first to the words _Iosa_ or Jesus, _Criosd_ or Christ, _Faidh_
the prophet, _Easpuig_ the bishop; as in _Maoliosa_ or _Giolliosa_,
servant of Jesus, _Maolanfhaidh_ or _Gillanfhaidh_, servant of the
prophet, _Giollachriosd_, servant of Christ, and _Gilleaspuig_, servant
of the bishop: and secondly, to the names of the founders and patron
saints of the churches, as in _Maolcoluim_ or _Giollacoluim_, servant of
St. Columba; _Maolbride_ or _Giollabride_, servant of St. Bridget;
_Giollachattan_, servant of St. Cathan; _Gillanaemh_, servant of the
saints; _Giollaeoin_, servant of St. John, etc. In these latter names,
when combined with the word Clan or Mac, if they commence with a
consonant, the prefix _Giolla_ is usually omitted, as in Clanchattan,
MacCallum, etc.; but if they commence with a vowel, they form that
numerous class of names in which Mac is followed by the letter L. Thus
_MacGiollaeoin_ becomes Maclean; _MacGiolla Adomnan_, MacLennan, etc.
The conquest of the Western Isles, and the frequent occupation of parts
of the mainland by the Norwegians and Danes, and the intermarriages
between them, added to these forms, after the ninth century, Norwegian
and Danish names, such as Godfred, Harald, Ragnall, Somarled, etc.,
which became _Gofraidh, Aralt, Ranald, Somhairle_, in the Highland
Genealogies. It must not, however, be overlooked that the Norwegians
frequently gave to Gaelic names a Norwegian form significant in their
own language, as Dungadr for _Donnachaidh_, Griotgardr for _Gregair_,
Melkolfr for _Maolcoluim_, etc.

[Sidenote: Original importance and position of Clan pedigrees.]

In considering the genealogies of the Highland clans we must bear in
mind that in the early state of the tribal organisation the pedigree of
the sept or clan, and of each member of the tribe, had a very important
meaning. Their rights were derived through the common ancestor, and
their relation to him, and through him to each other, indicated their
position in the succession, as well as their place in the allocation of
the tribe land. In such a state of society the pedigree occupied the
same position as the title-deed in the feudal system, and the Sennachies
were as much the custodiers of the rights of families as the mere
panegyrists of the clan. As long as the Gaelic tribes and the governing
and dominant race were of the same lineage, and regulated by the same
laws, this system must have remained unaltered; but when the kingdom was
formed by a combination of different races, and the influential class
consisted of a feudal nobility, while the laws of the country were based
upon feudal principles, the position of the Gaelic tribes must have been
that of a people possessing a customary law, and an unrecognised social
system opposed to the law acted upon by the governing authority, and the
latter must always have prevailed in the long-run. When the conflict of
these laws in regulating succession, and the frequent insurrections of
the Gaelic population, with the confiscations which followed upon them,
led to the breaking up of the Gaelic tribes, and to the severance of
those ties which bound the septs or clans which had been developed
within the tribe to each other, the pedigree would cease to be of value
as between clan and clan. The competition between rival interests and
rival races would lead to the gratification of vanity becoming the
ruling motive, in order to maintain a _quasi_ superiority, and likewise,
when the exigencies of their position required it, to a falsification
and imposture in order to enable the clans to maintain their ground in a
field of competition regulated by feudal principles. The pedigrees must
then have been greatly influenced by those into competition with whom
the clan families were thrown, and by the interests affected in
consequence; and when the governing class belonged to a kindred but
different race with a different nationality and nomenclature, there must
always have been a tendency to assimilate their own traditions to those
of the ruling powers. Till the ninth century the Highland tribes and the
ruling powers were of the same race. During the two succeeding centuries
these tribes appear to have remained intact, while the dominating race
and the clergy were of a kindred race though of a different name and
nationality, and the name of Scotia became transferred from Ireland to
Scotland. Feudalism then commenced, and spread over the country, and the
reigns of the kings of the second Scottish dynasty from the accession of
David the First to the death of Alexander the Third was the period of
the breaking up of the tribes, and the complete establishment of the
clan system; and this likewise was the period of the manipulation of the
Chronicles, and the gradual formation of that spurious system of
national history which, originating in the ecclesiastical pretensions of
St. Andrews, was developed during the great controversy regarding the
independence of Scotland, and based upon a Scottish nationality and the
supposed colonisation of the country long before the Christian era by
Scota and her Scottish descendants, till it was finally reduced to a
system by John of Fordun. Its leading features were the colonisation of
the Highlands by Scots in the third century before Christ, their
conversion in the second century by the relics of St. Andrew, the
occupation of the mountain region of the north by the Picts entirely
ignored, and that people relegated to the plains of the Lowlands, when
they were finally exterminated by the Scots in the ninth century.

[Sidenote: First change in Clan pedigrees. Influence of legendary
           history of Scotland.]

It is hardly to be expected that the clans should not have claimed their
share in these legendary glories, or that they should have lost the wish
to maintain a separate descent with the gradual disappearance of its
tradition, and thus this new and preponderating influence would
naturally produce the first great change in the clan pedigrees. This
change is very clearly exposed in the remarkable letter already quoted
of John Elder, clerk, a Reddeshanke, to King Henry the Eighth. In that
letter he thus gives the origin of ‘the Yrische Lords of Scotland,
commonly called the Reddshanckes, and by historiographers, Picts.’
‘Scotland,’ he says, ‘before the incoming of Albanactus, Brutus’s second
son, was inhabited, as we read in ancient Yrische stories, with giants
and wild people, without order, civility, or manners, and speaks none
other language but Yrishe, and was then called Eyryn veagg, that is to
say, Little Irland, and the people were callit Eyrynghe, that is to say,
Irland men. But after the incoming of Albanactus, in reducing them to
order and civility they changed the foresaid name Eyryn veagg, and
called it Albon, and their owne names also and called them Albonyghe;
which two Yrische wordes, Albon, that is to say Scotland, and Albonyghe,
that is to say Scottish men, be derived from Albanactus, our first
governor and king.’ At the time John Elder wrote, Yrishe, afterwards
corrupted into Erse, was currently used for Gaelic; and deducting the
nonsense about Eyryn veagg, which seems a fancy of his own, this is the
legendary story contained in our earliest documents before the
Chronicles were tampered with; but then he gave in to say, ‘which
derivation the papistical cursed spirituality of Scotland will not hear
in no manner of wise, nor confess that ever such a king, named
Albanactus, reigned there. The which derivation all the Yrische men of
Scotland, which be the ancient stock, cannot nor will not deny.’ ‘But
our said bishops,’ he adds, ‘deriveth Scotland and themselves from a
certain lady named Scota, which came out of Egypt, a miraculous hot
country, to recreate herself amongst them in the cold air of Scotland,
which they cannot affirm by no probable ancient author.’[466]

[Sidenote: Second change. Influence of Irish Sennachies.]

The clans, however, were soon after thrown into rapidly-increasing
contact with those of Ireland, a people possessing similar pedigrees,
and Sennachies surpassing those of Scotland in information and
acquirements. The native Sennachies by degrees fell into the background,
and the clans began to take their Sennachies from the rival race. The
first connection between them which had this effect, was the marriage of
Angus, Lord of the Isles, who assisted Bruce in his struggle for the
crown, with the daughter of O’Kane, Lord of Fermanagh, and widow of the
great O’Neill. During the two following centuries septs of the Highland
clans were employed as auxiliaries by the great northern Lords of
Ireland, under the name of _Galloglach_ or foreign soldiers, commonly
called Galloglasses. There is ample evidence that during this period a
great proportion of the Highland Sennachies were Irish, and that all
reverted to Ireland for instruction in their art. It could hardly have
been otherwise than that, with the disappearance of the old Highland
pedigrees, every presumption and analogy would have driven these
Sennachies to the better-preserved Irish pedigrees, to replace what had
been lost by connecting them more directly with the Irish tribes, and
thus the second great change in the character of their pedigree would be
produced. For the clan genealogies at this time we must therefore refer
to the Irish MSS., and they are in fact the oldest pedigrees which have
been preserved. The MS. collections in which we find them are, first,
the Book of Ballimote compiled in the year 1383, the Book of Lecain
compiled in 1407, and a MS. belonging to the Faculty of Advocates
bearing the date 1467, but the genealogies in which are obviously
derived from the same source as those in the Book of Ballimote.[467] To
these may be added a few genealogies in other MSS., and those preserved
by MacVurich in the Book of Clan Ranald.

[Sidenote: Analysis of the Irish Pedigrees.]

In these MSS. we find detailed pedigrees of most of the clans enumerated
in the Acts of Parliament of 1587 and 1594, and of several clans not
there mentioned, as well as of some of the surnames. The later portion
of these pedigrees, as far back as the _eponymus_ or common ancestor
from which the clan takes its name, are in general tolerably well
vouched, and may be held to be authentic. The older part of the pedigree
will be found to be partly historical and partly mythic. So far as these
links in the genealogic chain connect the clans with each other within
what may be termed the historic period, the pedigree may be genuine; but
the links which connect them with the mythic genealogies of the
elaborate system of early Irish history, when analysed, prove to be
entirely artificial and untrustworthy. In examining the nature of these
pedigrees it will be convenient to group them according to their
supposed connection with the legendary races of early Irish
history.[468]

The first group consists of the Clan _Cailin_ or Campbells, and the Clan
_Leod_ or MacLeods, who are brought from a mythic personage, viz.,
_Fergus Leith Derg_, son of _Nemedh_, who led a colony of Nemedians from
Ireland to Scotland. This Nemedian colony belongs to the older legendary
history of Scotland before the Chronicles were corrupted, and may
therefore indicate these clans as forming part of the older inhabitants
of the districts they occupy. On examining the genealogy of the
Campbells we may consider it as authentic as far back as Duncan, son of
Gilleaspic, son of Gillacolum, son of Duibne, who is certainly the
Duncan M‘Duibhn mentioned in one of the Argyll charters as possessing
Lochow and Ardskeodnich, and who was contemporary with Alexander the
Second. As the Campbells were undoubtedly known in Gaelic as the _Clan
O’Duibne_,[469] the genealogy as far back as that eponymus of the race
is probably authentic; but as soon as we pass that link we find
ourselves in contact with Arthur and Uthyr Pendragon, and the other
heroes of the Arthurian legend. With the Macleods we cannot proceed so
far back, as Leod, the eponymus of the clan, cannot be placed earlier
than the middle of the thirteenth century; and as soon as we pass these
links in the chain of his pedigree, which have Gaelic names, we plunge
into a confused list of names, partly Gaelic and partly of Norwegian and
Danish kings of the Isles, with which they are mixed up, till we reach
the mythic _Fergus Leith Derg_, whose grandson bears the Norwegian name
of Arailt or Harald, centuries before the Norwegians made their
appearance in the Isles. The earlier portion then of these two
genealogies is obviously artificial.

The next group consists of the supposed descendants of Colla Uais, son
of Eochaidh Doimlein, king of Ireland, and comprised the clans descended
from Somerled, the petty king of the great district of Argyll in the
reign of Malcolm the Fourth. These genealogies, as far back as their
great ancestor Somerled, are undoubtedly authentic. His father
_Gillabride_, and his grandfather _Gillaadomnan_, both purely Gaelic
forms, rest on the authority of the Irish Annals, and _Imergi_, the
grandfather of the latter, is probably the Jehmarc, who appears as a
Celtic petty king in the year 1031. Beyond this we have no fixed date,
but between him and Colla Uais, whose death is placed at 323, we have
only seven names given for a period of 700 years, or one hundred years
to a generation, which is impossible, and betrays the artificial
character of this part of the pedigree.

The third group consists of clans supposed to be descended from the Hy
Neill or race of _Neill naoi giallach_, king of Ireland, which brings us
nearer historical times. They consist of the Lamonds, the Clan Lachlan,
the MacEwens of Otter, and a Clan _Somairle_ which has not been
identified. These clans are all taken back to a certain Aoda Alain,
termed _Buirche_, son of Anrotan, son of _Aodha Atlamuin_, ancestors of
the O’Neills. From Aoda’s son Gillacrist the Clan Lachlan came, and from
another son Duinsleibe the Lamonds, MacEwens, and Clan Somairle. The
genealogy of the Lamonds is authentic as far back as Fearchar, the son
of Duinsleibe, but Ferchar’s son and grandson are mentioned in a charter
in 1246,[470] while the death of Aodha Alain is recorded in 1047, and
thus only three generations are placed in two centuries. This derivation
too involves the difficulty of supposing that Cowall was peopled from
Ireland in the eleventh century, a colony of which there is not a trace
in history; but as these clans are locally grouped together we may
accept the genealogies as indicating that they had a common origin.

The fourth group consists of the old earls of Lennox and Mar, said to be
descended from _Maine Leamna_ and _Cairbre Cruithneach_, sons of Corc,
son of Lughaigh, king of Munster; but the artificial character of this
descent is here very apparent, for Ailin, the first earl of Lennox, who
lived in the beginning of the thirteenth century, is made the
great-grandson of _Maine Leamna_, whose father was a contemporary of
Saint Patrick in the fifth century.

The rest of the Highland clans, whose genealogies are to be found in the
Irish MSS., are all brought from the Dalriadic Scots. These clans are
mainly connected with the province of Moray and Ross, and thus we have
the great anomaly presented to us that the clans forming the great bulk
of the inhabitants of Argyll and the Isles—such as the Campbells and
Macleods, the great race of the Macdougalls of Lorn, and the Macdonalds
of the Isles and Kintyre, and the MacLachlans and Lamonds of Cowall—are
not connected by their genealogies with the Dalriadic colony, but this
origin is reserved for the more eastern clans of the central Highlands.
There is too the further anomaly that these clans are not deduced from
the tribe of _Gabhran_, which furnished kings to Dalriada, and from
which the Scottish dynasty founded by Kenneth MacAlpin probably sprang,
but from the tribe of _Lorn_, which furnished two kings only to
Dalriada, and only came to the front to be immediately annihilated by
the Pictish monarch in 736, and then disappear entirely from history.
The links in the chain of ancestry which connect these clans with the
tribe of Lorn, however, present the same features of artificial
construction which characterise the other. In examining these we must
group them in four classes. First, those brought from _Fearchar Fada_,
king of Dalriada, of the tribe of Lorn, who died in 697. These are first
the _Mormaers_ of Moray. This genealogy is probably correct enough up to
Ruadhri, who is made son of Airceallach, son of Ferchar; but allowing
the usual average of thirty years to a generation, Ruadhri flourished
about the year 840, that is, was contemporary with Kenneth MacAlpin,
while the death of his supposed father Airceallach, by whom Ainbhcellach
is probably meant, is recorded in 719. Then follows the genealogy of the
MacNaughtons, whose eponymus _Neachtain Mor_ is made the son of Domnall
Duinn, son of Fearchar Fada; but Neachtain Mor cannot be placed earlier
than the beginning of the ninth century, and he too must have been
contemporary with Kenneth MacAlpin, while his supposed grandfather died
in 697. This is followed by the genealogy of the Clan Chattan, and here
the anomaly is still greater, for _Gillachattan_, the eponymus of the
race, must have flourished in the eleventh century, but between him and
Fearchar Fada are only four links during three centuries and a half. Of
these links the father Gallbrait and the grandfather Diarmada, called
the _Fearleighinn_ or Lector, are probably historical. Along with these
the Clan Cameron are placed, though their genealogy does not show the
connection with the Dalriads. They were undoubtedly a kindred tribe with
the Clan Chattan.

The next group is connected with a _Fearchar Abraruadh_ son of _Feradach
Finn_, and therefore a brother of Fearchar Fada, but unknown to history,
and the only genealogy preserved is that of the _Clan Gillaeoin_ or
Macleans. This genealogy is given with so much minuteness up to a
certain _Sean Dubhgal Sgoinne_, or Old Dugald of Scone, and the
ecclesiastical character of the upper links are so obvious, that it is
difficult to avoid regarding it as so far trustworthy. This Dubhgal has
a son Raingce; and he has three sons—_Cuduilig_, abbot of Leasamor, that
is, lay abbot of the monastery of Lismore in Argyllshire, from whom
descended _Gillaeoin_, the eponymus of the clan; _Cuchatha_, from whom
sprang the _Clan Chonchatha_, in the district of Lennox, by whom
possibly the Colquhouns are meant; and _Cusithe_, from whom came the
_Clan Consithe_ of Fife, which has not been identified. According to the
usual calculation, old Dugald of Scone must have flourished about 1100,
and in a perambulation of the lands of Kyrknesse and Lochow, in the
district of Fortrenn, not long after that date, we find the arbiters
were Constantine earl of Fife, Magnus Judex or _Mormaer_ in Scotland,
Dufgal, son of Mocche, who was aged, just, and venerable (_senex,
justus, et venerabilis_), and Meldoinneth son of Machedath, a good and
discreet judge (_judex bonus et discretus_).[471] It can hardly be
doubted that this Dufgal senex is the _Sean Dubhgal_ of Scone of the
pedigree, but in that genealogy he is made the son not of Mocche but of
Fearchar Abraruadh, who must be placed four centuries earlier.

The next group is brought from _Domnaill Duinn_, son of _Fearadhach
Finn_, and consists of the _Clan Labhran_, or Maclarens, and the Clan
Aidh. The _Clan Labhran_ are deduced from an abbot of Achtus, by which
no doubt Achtow in Balquhidder, where this clan had its seat, is meant,
and his pedigree is deduced from Domnall Og, son of Domnall Duinn.
According to the usual computation, Domnall Oig must be placed in the
ninth century, thus contemporary with Kenneth MacAlpin, while his father
is made brother of Fearchar Fada, who died in 697. The same remark
applies to the genealogy of the clan Aidh. They cannot be identified
with any modern clan, but a Gillamithil, son of Aidh, the eponymus of
the clan, falls about the same time with Gillemychel M‘Ath, father of
Duncan, who, in 1232, excambs a davach of land in Strathardel, called
Petcarene, with the bishop of Moray for the lands of Dolays Michel in
Strathspey.[472]

The remaining genealogies in these MSS. have one common feature, that
the genealogy of each of the clans contains in it the name of Cormac,
son of Airbertach, but he is differently connected with the line of
Lorn, and is placed in many of the genealogies at a different period.
They may be thus grouped. The first consists of the _Clan Andres_ or
Rosses, the _Clan Cainig_ or Mackenzies, and the _Clan Matgamma_ or
Mathesons. These are all brought from a common ancestor, _Gilleoin na
hairde_ or Gilleon of the Aird, by which, no doubt, the mountainous
region in the centre of Ross-shire, the old name of which was Airdross,
or the Aird of Ross, is meant. The Rosses and Mathesons are brought from
his son Cristin, and the Mackenzies from another son, Gilleon Og, father
of _Cainig_ or Kenneth, the eponymus of the clan. _Gilleon na hAirde_ is
made grandson of Loarn, son of Fearchar, son of Cormac mac Airbertach,
and the usual calculation would place Cormac in the tenth century; but
his father Airbertach is made son of Feradach, and brother of Fearchar
Fada, who died in 697. To this group may be added the _Clan Duibsithe_
or Macduffys of Lochaber and Colonsay, who are brought from Fearchar,
son of Cormac; but the connecting links are shorter and bring him down
to two centuries later. The Macnabs are likewise brought from Loarn, son
of Fearchar, son of Cormac, which would relegate him also to the tenth
century; but in this genealogy, instead of placing Cormac in immediate
connection with Fearadach, he is made son of Erc, son of Domnaill Duinn,
son of Fearchar Abraruadh, thus corresponding more with the early part
of the genealogy of the Clan Labhran and Clan Aidh. The Clan Gregor is
likewise brought from Cormac by a son Ainnrias or Andrew, and by this
genealogy he is placed in the twelfth century, and is made son of
Fearchar Oig, son of Fearchar Fada, who died in 697. The last group
consists of the _Clan Guaire_ or Macquarrys, the _Clan Fingaine_ or
Mackinnons, the _Clan Gillamhaol_ or Macmillans, and the _Clan
Gillaagamnan_ or Maclennans, descended respectively from four sons of
Cormac—Guaire, Fingaine, Gillcrist called _Gillamhaol_, and
Gillaagamnan. By these genealogies Cormac is brought down a century
later, and this is probably his true date, and as an ancestor of these
clans he is also probably an historical personage, for in the genealogy
of the _Clan Gillamhaol_ it is added that his father Airbertach
possessed twelve tribes or septs (_Treabh_) among the Norwegians—viz.,
in _Greagraidhe_ of the warriors, commonly called Mull, and in Tiree,
and in _Craobhinis_, by which Iona is meant, while it is in Mull and the
neighbouring islands that the Maclennans and Macquarrys had their
possessions; but in these genealogies Airbertach is made son of
Murcertach, son of Fearchar Og, and between the latter and Fearchar
Fada, the names of Macbeth and his father Finnlaoch, which really belong
to the genealogy of the Mormaers of Moray, are introduced.

[Sidenote: Artificial character of these pedigrees.]

It is thus obvious how artificial the earlier links of these genealogies
are, and that none of them can in fact be pushed further back than the
reign of Kenneth MacAlpin, the oldest link in many of them being
contemporary with him, while others fall short of that period. Between
the oldest link of those which reach that date and the Dalriadic king of
the race of Lorn with which they are connected there is a complete
blank, and it is thus plain that the same process of manipulation and
artificial construction had taken place with these pedigrees, which had
perverted the genealogy of the kings of the line of Kenneth MacAlpin. In
the latter case an entire century, with all its events, from 740 to 840,
had been suppressed, and Kenneth, the founder of the new dynasty in the
ninth century, directly connected with the last of the old kings of
Dalriada, of the race of Gabhran, who lived a century earlier. In like
manner the genealogies of the clans which reach only to the ninth
century, were directly connected with the last of the Dalriadic kings of
the line of Lorn, who died in 697. It is not without some significance
too that we find such Pictish forms as _Neachtain_, _Fingaine_,
_Morgainn_, etc., occurring in the early part of these pedigrees. They
may then be regarded as trustworthy only in so far as they show the
links of the descent of each clan from its _eponymus_ as believed in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and the grouping of certain clans
together where a common ancestor within the historic period is assigned
to them.

[Sidenote: Third change. Influence of Act of 1597.]

During the sixteenth century the clans were brought into direct contact
with the Crown, and in the latter part of it serious efforts were made
by the Legislature to establish an efficient control over them. These
gave rise to the Acts of 1587 and 1594, already referred to; but they
were followed in a few years by an important Statute, which had a
powerful effect upon the position of the clans, and led to another great
change in the theory of their descent. In the Parliament held at
Edinburgh in December 1597, an Act was passed bearing the short but most
pregnant title ‘That the inhabitants of the Ilis and Hielandis shaw
their haldings.’ This Act proceeds on the narrative ‘that the
inhabitants of the Highlands and Isles of this realm, which are for the
most part of his Highness’s annexed property has not only frustrated his
Majesty of the yearly payment of his proper rents and due service
addebted by them to his Majesty furth of the said lands, but that they
have likewise through their barbarous inhumanity made and presently
makes the said Highlands and Isles, which are most commodious in
themselves as well by the fertility of the ground as by rich fishings,
be so altogether unprofitable both to themselves and to all others his
Highness’s lieges within this realm, they neither interfering any civil
or honest society amongst themselves neither yet admitted others his
Highness’s lieges to traffic within their bounds with safety of their
lives and goods;’ and in order that they ‘may the better be reduced to
ane godly honest and civil manner of living It is statute and ordained
that all landlords chieftains and leaders of clans, principal
householders, heritors and others possessors or pretending right to any
lands within the Highlands and Isles shall betwixt this and the
fifteenth day of May next to come compear before the Lords of his
Highness’s Exchequer at Edinburgh or where it shall happen to sit for
the time and there bring and produce with them all their infeftments
rights and titles whatsomever whereby they claim right and title to any
part of the lands and fishings within the bounds foresaid, and then find
sufficient caution acted in the books of Exchequer for yearly and
thankful payment to his Majesty of his rents yearly duties and service
addedit by them furth of the lands possessed and occupied by them or any
in their names and that they themselves their men, tenants, servants,
and dependants shall be answerable to his Highness’s laws and Justices.’
The penalty imposed upon them in case of their failure to appear and
find caution was, that they were ‘to forfeit amit and tyne (lose) all
pretended infeftments and other right and title they have or may pretend
to have to any lands whatever they have holden or pretend to hold of his
Majesty either in property or superiority which their pretended
infeftments and titles thereof in case of failure are now as then and
then as now declared by this present Parliament to be null and of no
avail force or effect in themselves.’[473] It has been necessary to
quote this Act at some length, in order to show what a powerful weapon
it placed in the hands of the Crown, and the embarrassing and precarious
position in which it placed the greater proportion of the clans. Many of
them had received charters of their lands which had perished during the
troubles and conflicts which had followed the forfeiture of the Lords of
the Isles. Others had no other right to their lands than what was
derived from the forfeited lords. In other cases, where the right to the
clan demesne was the subject of dispute between different septs, both
parties had received at different times a quasi-title to them. In many
cases the nominal superiority was feudally vested in an alien family,
while the land was actually possessed by one of the clans; and in many
others they had no title but immemorial possession, which they
maintained by the sword; while, on the other hand, those who already
possessed a nominal right to the lands under feudal titles which they
had been unable to enforce, or who saw a great prospect, through the
threatened forfeitures, of acquiring possessions in the Highlands and
Isles, would eagerly avail themselves of the opportunity afforded them
by this Statute. The chiefs of the clans thus found themselves compelled
to defend their rights upon grounds which could compete with the claims
of their eager opponents, and to maintain an equality of rank and
prestige with them in the Heralds’ Office, which must drive them to
every device necessary to effect their purpose; and they would not
hesitate to manufacture titles to the land when they did not exist, and
to put forward spurious pedigrees better calculated to maintain their
position when a native descent had lost its value and was too weak to
serve their purpose.

[Sidenote: Spurious Pedigrees.]

From this period manuscript histories of the leading Highland families
began to be compiled, in which these pretensions were advanced and
spurious charters inserted, and from these manuscript histories were
compiled the later account of the clans contained in the Peerage and
Baronage, as well as in the ‘Inquiry and the Genealogy and Present State
of the Ancient Scottish Surnames, with the Origin and Descent of the
Highland Clans and Family of Buchanan, by William Buchanan of Auchmar,’
published in the year 1723. The form which these pretentious genealogies
took was that of making the _eponymus_ or male ancestor of the clan a
Norwegian, Dane, or Norman, or a cadet of some distinguished family, who
succeeded to the chiefship and to the territory of the clan by marriage
with the daughter and heiress of the last of the old Celtic line, thus
combining the advantage of a descent which could compete with that of
the great Norman families with a feudal succession to their lands; and
the new form of the clan genealogy would have the greater tendency to
assume this form where the clan name was derived not from a personal
name or patronymic but from a personal epithet of its founder. Thus
Hacken, a Norwegian, was said from his prowess to have been termed
_Grandt_, or great, and his grandson _Aulan_, or Allan Grandt, marries
Mora, daughter and heiress of Neil Macgregor, a descendant of Gregory
the Great, king of Scotland, with whom he obtains the barony of
Bellachastell and Freuchie in Strathspey, the patrimony of the Grants;
_Cambro_, a Dane,[474] in the beginning of the reign of Alexander the
Second, marries the daughter and heiress of MacMartin, proprietor of
that part of Lochaber now possessed by Lochiel, chief of the
Camerons;[475] Colin Fitzgerald, son to the earl of Kildare in Ireland,
marries the daughter and heiress of Kenneth Matheson, from whom his son
Kenneth was called _Mackenneth_ or Mackenzie, and obtained with her the
lands of Kintail;[476] Angus MacIntosh, descended from Shaw Macduff, a
second son of the earl of Fife, marries Eva, daughter and heiress of
Gilpatrick, son of Dougal Dall, chief of the Clan Chattan, and obtained
with her the lands of Glenluy and Locharkaig;[477] and even the powerful
family of the Campbells, who had always supported the Crown, and whose
chief had been created earl of Argyll, caught the infection, and now
asserted that Malcolm, son of Duibhne, the _eponymus_ of the clan, had
gone to Normandy, and there married the daughter and heiress of the
Norman family of De Campobello, and took the name, which was corrupted
into Campbell, and his son marries the inevitable Eva, daughter of Paul
MacDuibhne, the last of the old line.[478]

The foundation of the Grant story seems merely to be that the earliest
Grant known was Gregory le Grant, whose sons Laurence and Robert called
Grant (_dicti Grant_) witness an agreement between the bishop of Moray
and John Bisset in 1258. The name Grant is obviously a personal epithet,
and may as well be derived from the Gaelic _Grannda_, ill-favoured, as
from the Latin _Grandis_, or any other foreign word which resembles it.

The Clan Chameron, as we have seen, formed originally one tribe with the
Clan Chattan, and their true ancestor in the early part of the reign of
Alexander the Second can be ascertained, for the Irish MSS. deduce their
descent from a certain Gillroid, son of Gillamartan, to whom a line of
Celtic progenitors is given, and he seems to be the same person with the
Gillroth who, according to Fordun, was the chief supporter of Gillespic
Macohegan, of the line of MacWilliam, who raised an insurrection in
1222, as a charter of lands in Galloway, about the same period, is
witnessed by Gillespic Macohegan and Gilleroth son of Gillemartan.[479]

But the most remarkable of these spurious origins is that claimed by the
Mackenzies. It appears to have been first put forward by Sir George
Mackenzie, first Earl of Cromarty, who wrote an account of the family in
the form of a letter, and afterwards a shorter account under the title
of ‘The Genealogie of the Mackenzies preceding the year 1661, written in
the year 1669 by a persone of qualitie,’[480] of which there is no doubt
he was the author. The story, as told by him in the first account, is
this:—‘Tradition informs us that our first was a sone of the earl of
Kildare’s, who came to Scotland in King Alexander the Third’s time,
called Coline Gerald, fought on the side of the Scots at the battle of
Largs;’ but finding that there was no earl of Kildare till 1290, he
corrects it by making him son of John Fitz-Thomas, chief of the
Geraldines in Ireland, and father of John, first earl of Kildare, who
was slain in 1261. But in the second account, two sons of John
Fitz-Thomas, Colin and Galen, fled to Scotland, were graciously received
by Alexander the Third, and the next year fought at the battle of Largs.
After the battle Walter Stewart was sent with forces to reduce the
Isles, and builds a fort in Kintail, called the Danting Isle, in which
Colin Fitzgerald is placed with a garrison. He then marries the daughter
of Kenneth _MacMahon_ or Matheson, with whom he gets one-half of
Kintail, the other half belonging to the earl of Ross, and has a son
Kenneth, from whom his descendants were called _M‘Channiches_, taking
their patronymic from the M‘Mahon rather than from Colin, whom they
esteemed a stranger. In support of this story two documents are quoted.
First, a fragment of the records of Icolmkill, which he says were
preserved by him, and mention the principal actors in the battle of
Largs, among whom is ‘a stranger and Irishman of the family of the
Geraldines, who, driven from Ireland, was in the following year
graciously received by the king, remained at his court, and valiantly
fought in the foresaid battle, and afterwards fought against the
Islesmen, and was left among them in garrison.’[481] The other is a
charter by King Alexander, granting, for faithful service rendered by
Colin the Irishman (_per Colinum Hybernum_) to the said Colin the whole
lands of Kintail as a barony. This charter bears to be granted in the
sixteenth year of his reign, before the following witnesses—Archibald,
bishop of Moray; Walter Stewart; Henry de Balioth, chamberlain; Arnold
de Campan; and Thomas Hostiarius, sheriff of Inverness.[482] The same
mistake is here committed, as is usual in manufacturing these pedigree
charters, by making it a crown charter erecting the lands into a barony.
Kintail could not have been a barony at that time, and the earl of Ross
and not the king was superior, for in 1342 the earl of Ross grants the
ten davachs of the lands of Kintail to Reginald, son of Roderick of the
Isles;[483] and we find that the Mackenzies held their lands of the earl
of Ross, and afterwards of the duke of Ross till 1508,[484] when they
were all erected into a barony by King James the Fourth, who gave them a
crown charter. An examination of the witnesses, too, usually detects
these spurious charters, and in this case it is conclusive against the
charter. Andrew was bishop of Moray from 1223 to 1242, and there was no
bishop of that name in the reign of Alexander the Third. Henry de Baliol
was chamberlain in the reign of Alexander the Second, and not of
Alexander the Third. Thomas Hostiarius belongs to the same reign, and
had been succeeded by his son Alan long before the date of this charter.
The names of the witnesses seem to have been taken from some charter of
Alexander the Second, which may have been granted in the sixteenth year
of his reign. It may be said that this was a genuine charter of
Alexander the Second, and that Colin Fitzgerald may have come over in
his reign; but then what becomes of the fragment of the Chronicle of
Icolmkill, which clearly connects him with the battle of Largs? The two
must stand or fall together, and the evidence of the construction of a
false legend is too palpable to be disputed.[485] The earl of Cromarty
refers to tradition; but if not the actual inventor of the story, it
must have taken its rise not very long before, for no trace of it is to
be found in the Irish MSS., the history of the Geraldine family knows
nothing of it,[486] and MacVureach, who must have been acquainted with
the popular history of the western clans, was equally unacquainted with
it. We have seen that in the second edition of the story the earl gives
Colin a brother Galen, and he is claimed by the Macleans as their
ancestor, who likewise superseded their older traditionary history by a
Fitzgerald origin; but we can trace how this arose, and it will
illustrate how these later forms of the clan origins were constructed.
In the Irish MSS. the Mackenzies and Macleans have quite a different
origin assigned to them, and there is no apparent connection between
them. The Mackenzies are brought from a certain Gilleon Og, son of
Gilleon na hairde, but in the genealogies of the Macleans there occurs
at a later period a Gilleon, whose pedigree is quite different. In a
later form of the genealogy, however, preserved by MacVureach, the two
Gilleons have been identified, and a new genealogy manufactured from
those of the two clans. The pedigrees of the Mackenzies and Mathesons
are combined till they reach Gilleon na hairde, and they then merge into
that of the Macleans. The Mackenzies and Macleans are thus brought from
two brothers, and when the Mackenzies adopted the Fitzgerald origin the
Macleans naturally followed suit.

The earl, not content with putting forward this spurious pedigree of his
own clan, showed his talent for constructing new pedigrees in the case
of the Macleods, whom he took under his protection in consequence of the
acquisition by the Mackenzies of the island of Lewis, the patrimony of
one of the two great branches of that powerful clan. Their pedigree, as
shown in the Irish MSS., had already been tampered with, for in a MS.
history of the Rosses of Balnagown, written prior to the Cromarty MS.,
it is stated that three sons of the king of Denmark, called _Gwine_,
_Loid_, and _Leandres_, came out of Denmark and landed in the north of
Scotland. ‘_Gwine_, conquest the Hieland brayes of Cathness; _Loid_
conquest the Lewis, of whom M‘Loid is descended; _Leandres_ conquest
Braychat be the sworde.’ By the _Gwine_ here mentioned the ancestor of
the Clan Gunn seems to be meant, and _Leandres_ is obviously the
Gilleandres from whom the Clan Andres, or old Rosses, took their name.
This derivation of the Macleods did not satisfy the ingenious earl, and
after narrating the history of the Norwegian kings of Mann and the
Isles, taken entirely from the Chronicle of Mann, he adds that Harald,
the son of Godred Don, who usurped the kingdom in 1249, and was arrested
by the king of Norway when attending his court and detained there, was
succeeded by Leodus, his only son, who married Adama, daughter to
Ferquhar, earl of Ross, and by her had Torkell and Tormoth, who founded
the families of Lewis and Harris.[487] Of this there is, however, not
one word in the Chronicle, which knows nothing of Harald after his
imprisonment in Norway. This is the first appearance of the supposed
descent of the Macleods from the Norwegian kings of Mann, of which the
ingenious earl was no doubt the author, if he was not also the inventor
of the Fitzgerald story; but it is again improved upon by the account
furnished to Douglas for his Baronage, where Harald is given up, and
Olave the Black, king of Mann, who died in 1237, and whose second wife
was Christina, daughter of Ferquhard, earl of Ross, is substituted, and
said to have had by her three sons—‘_Leod_, the undoubted progenitor of
the Clan Macleod; _Guin_, of whom the Clan Gunn in Sutherland are
descended; and _Leandres_, of whom the Clan Leandres in Ross-shire;’ but
the Chronicle which mentions his marriage knows nothing of these sons,
and this filiation must be regarded as equally spurious with the
other.[488] It is probable, however, that we have a fragment of the true
pedigree of the Macleods in one of the Irish MSS., which places Leod in
the thirteenth century, and makes him son of _Gillemuire_, son of
_Raice_, son of _Olbair Snoice_, son of _Gillemuire_, whose mother is
said to have been _Ealga_ of the Fair Locks, daughter of Harold, king of
_Lochlan_ or Norway.[489] They were Celtic in the male line, Norwegian
in the female.

The supposed descent of the Macintoshes from the MacDuffs, earls of
Fife, was, no doubt, based on the interpretation of the name, which
means literally ‘the son of the thane;’ but this theory of their descent
could only have arisen after the legend of Macduff, thane of Fife,
assumed a prominent place in the fabulous history of Scotland. He was
the thane _par excellence_, and the MacIntoshes were naturally connected
with him as such; but, as there were in reality no thanes of Fife, and
the old earls never bore that title, this descent cannot be supported,
and must fall along with the supposed marriage with the heiress of Clan
Chattan, and the charter said to have been granted in 1338 by David II.,
which is no doubt a spurious pedigree charter, and commits the usual
blunder of making it a crown charter, while the superiority of Lochaber
was in the Lords of the Isles. In the MS. histories of the MacIntoshes,
the whole race, including the old MacIntoshes, is brought from the thane
of Fife, but there is another form of it which attaches the legend to
the later family, the descendant of Malcolm MacIntosh, who, by the
influence of the Lords of the Isles, after the secession of the old Clan
Chattan in 1429, acquired the position of Captain of the Clan; for we
are told in the Knock MS. that Angus of the Isles had, by the daughter
of John Gruamach Mackay, ‘the mother of the first Laird of MacIntosh,
for a son of MacDuff, thane of Fife, coming after manslaughter to
shelter himself in Macdonald’s house, got her daughter with child, went
to Ireland with Edward Bruce, where he was killed; by which means
MacIntosh is of natural (illegitimate) descent, his progenitor being got
in that manner. MacIntosh in the ancient language signifies a Thane’s
son. The boy was brought up by Macdonald, who in process of time
procured a competent estate for him in the Braes of Lochaber and Braes
of Murray.’[490] This was _Callum beg_ or Malcolm MacIntosh, whose son
Duncan was the first Captain of Clan Chattan. The name MacIntosh,
however, clearly implies that they were the descendants of a thane. In
the family histories the MacIntoshes of Monzievaird in Stratherne and of
Tiryny in Athole are made cadets of the Macintosh, but we know that they
were in reality derived from the thanes of Struan and of Glentilt
respectively, and we must likewise look elsewhere for the thane from
whom the old Macintoshes of Badenoch descended. Now we find that in 1170
King William the Lion grants the lands of Brass, now Birse, in Deeside,
to the bishops of Aberdeen, ‘his thaynes being however excepted,’ that
is, retaining their lands as thanes. In 1226 King Alexander the Second
grants to the bishop of Moray the lands of Rathmorcus or Rothymurchus to
be held in free forest; and in 1241 to the bishop of Aberdeen the right
to hold his lands of Brass or Birse in free forest.[491] These grants in
free forest would exclude the thanes of their lands, but we find in 1382
a precept by King Robert the Second directed to his son Alexander
Stewart, Lord of Badenoch, requiring him to restrain Farchard MacToschy
and his adherents from disturbing the bishop of Aberdeen and his tenants
in the lands of Brass, and to oblige him to prosecute his claim by form
of law.[492] This Farchard appears in the genealogy of the old
MacIntoshes at the time, and the Lord of Badenoch must have been
regarded as his overlord. The tradition of the MacIntoshes is that
Rothiemurchus was their earliest possession, and when Alexander
MacIntosh obtains a feudal right to the lands in 1464 he is termed thane
of Rothymurchus.[493] It seems probable that the name was derived from
the thanes of Brass, who may also have been thanes of Rothiemurchus, and
from whom the old MacIntoshes were descended. In their genealogy the
name of _Gillemichael_, or the servant of St. Michael, appears in place
of the spurious Angus, the supposititious husband of Eva, and St.
Michael was the patron saint of the parish of Birse.[494] As possessors
of Rothiemurchus they are brought into immediate contact with that
branch of the old Clan Chattan whose principal seat was Dalnavert, and
no doubt were, as indicated in the older genealogies, a branch of that
clan. The representatives of these older MacIntoshes were, beyond doubt,
the Shaws of Rothiemurchus and the Farquharsons of Strathdee, who
extended from Badenoch as far as Birse, and whose head in 1464 was
Alexander Keir MacIntosh.

The resemblance of the name of Campbell in its more modern form to De
Campobello no doubt led to the supposed descent of the Campbells from a
Norman family of that name, but in order to produce a close resemblance
the Norman name has been inverted. Its real form was not De Campobello,
but De Bello Campo, and in Norman French Beauchamp. The resemblance is
still further lost in the older form of the name of the clan, which was
Cambell. The first of the race who appears on record with that
designation is Gillespie Cambell, who is mentioned in 1263 as having
received a grant of the lands of Mestreth and Salewhop, that is, Menstry
and Sawchop, from King Alexander the Third.[495] In one of the Irish
genealogies his father Dubhgal, son of Duncan, who is termed M‘Duine in
the charter of David II., appears as ‘Dubhgal Cambel _a quo_’, that is,
from whom the clan is named, and there seems little doubt that it was a
personal epithet analogous to that of Cameron, and that from him the
family formerly called MacDuibhne took his later name. His son was
Cailin Mor, and from him the head of the family bears the name of
MacCailin Mor, commonly corrupted to MacCallum Mor.

A foreign descent has likewise been attributed to the old earls of
Lennox, from whom the Clanpharlan and other Highland families were
undoubtedly descended, and it has been supposed that Alwyn MacArchill,
an Angle of Northumbria, was father of the first earl of Lennox. The
first known earl of Lennox undoubtedly bore the name of Alwyn, who had a
son Alwyn, second earl, father of Maelduin, and it is equally certain
that an Alwyn MacArchill repeatedly appears as witnessing charters of
David the First. This latter Alwyn first appears in the Lennox pedigree
in Crawford’s Peerage, published in 1716, where he is identified with
the first Alwyn. The next step in the process was to connect Arkill, the
father of Alwyn, with a certain Archillus, son of Aykfrith, a Saxon, who
had large estates in Northumbria, and fled to Scotland in 1070 to evade
the vengeance of William the Conqueror, and thus a Saxon origin is
assigned to the earls of Lennox. There is nothing, however, to support
this theory except the resemblance of names. Alwyn MacArchill never
appears bearing the title of Comes or Earl, and while he flourished
during the reign of David the First, and never appears after the year
1155, the first mention of Alwyn, earl of Lennox, cannot be placed
earlier than the year 1193, and between these dates we find David, earl
of Huntingdon, the brother of Malcolm the Fourth and William the Lion,
in possession of the earldom. There is therefore absolutely no authority
for this descent, and it was certainly unknown prior to the eighteenth
century.[496] On the other hand, Muredach Albanach, who was contemporary
with Alwyn, earl of Lennox, gives him a Celtic father Muredach, and thus
supports the old Irish pedigree, which makes him son of Muredach, son of
Maeldobhen, a descent antecedently probable, as this name of Maldoven or
Maeldouen occurs among the later earls, while the Annals of Ulster
record that in 1216 ‘Trad O’Mailfabhail, chief of Cinel Fergusa, with
his brothers and many others, was slain by Muireadhach, son of the
_Mormaer_ of Lennox,’ and the Celtic title of _Mormaer_ could hardly be
borne by a Saxon earl. This Maeldouen, the grandfather of Alwyn, first
earl, and the true ancestor of the race, must have lived in the early
part of the twelfth century, and is thus contemporary with Meldoinneth,
the son of Machedach, the ‘judex bonus and discretus,’ who, with
Constantine earl of Fife, and Dufgal son of Mocche, _qui fuit senex_,
joined in perambulating the lands of Kyrknesse; and as the latter
appears in the old Irish genealogy of the Macleans as the grandfather of
a lay abbot of Lismore and the ancestor of a Celtic clan, so in
Meldoinneth, son of Machedach, we may possibly recognise the
Maldobhnaigh, the grandfather of Alwyn, and the ancestor of the Gaelic
Lords of the Lennox.

The group of clans which sprang from the Lords of the Isles had their
origin within the historic period, and their pedigree is too well
authenticated to render a spurious version of it possible; while as the
lands they held of the Lords of the Isles were in the main confirmed
after the forfeiture of the last lord by the Crown, they were left
without any great motive to do so; but two other clans, who were in
reality not connected with them, seem to have thought it for their
interest to claim likewise a descent from the Lords of the Isles, and
both were connected with the earldom of Athole. These were the _Clan
Donnachie_ or Robertsons of Strowan, and the MacNabs of Glendochart. The
former clan simply exchanged Andrew de Atholia, the undoubted father of
Duncan de Atholia, the _eponymus_ of the clan, for Angus of the Isles,
but as Duncan is repeatedly designated in charters and other documents
the son of Andrew de Atholia, the supposed connection with the Lords of
the Isles is untenable. The MacNabs are stated by Buchanan of Auchmar to
be descended of a son of the first abbot of Inchaffray, whose surname
was M‘Donald, in the beginning of the reign of Alexander the Second.
Inchaffray, however, was founded in the reign of William the Lion, and
the first abbot was Malis, a pastor and hermit, and the second was
Innocent, who had been prior, and neither could have been connected with
the Macdonalds. The name MacNab certainly means the son of the abbot,
but we must look elsewhere for the monastery of which he must have been
the lay abbot. In the seventh century St. Fillan founded a monastery in
Glendochart, the upper part of which took its name of Strathfillan from
him, and in the reign of King William we find the abbot of Glendochart
ranking along with the earls of Atholl and of Menteath.[497] As the
property possessed by the MacNabs lay in Glendochart, and we find the
name of _Gillafaelan_, or servant of St. Fillan, occurring in their
oldest genealogy, we may certainly recognise in them the descendants of
the lay abbots of Glendochart. To the same class we may probably add the
Clan Gregor. Besides the genealogy of this clan contained in the Irish
MSS., Dean Macgregor furnishes us with one which may probably be viewed
as the native tradition. In it Gregor, the _eponymus_ of the clan, has a
different ancestry, and his pedigree is taken up to a certain _Aoidh
Urchaidh_, or Hugh of Glenurchay, which, as Glenurchay was an old
possession of the MacGregors, may be viewed as the native tradition and
more probable descent. The usual calculation would place him in the end
of the twelfth century, but the Dean connects him at once with Kenneth
MacAlpin in the ninth century,[498] and thus the supposed royal descent
of the MacGregors must be relegated to the same category with the
descent of the other clans from the kings of Dalriada. The son of this
Aodh bore, however, the name of _Gillafaelan_, or servant of St. Fillan,
and as the MacGregors likewise possessed property in Glendochart, they
were more probably connected with the MacNabs. The MacKinnons too were
closely connected with the abbacy of Iona, and repeatedly furnished
abbots to that monastery. The traditional connection between these three
clans—the MacNabs, the MacGregors, and the MacKinnons—is further
evidenced by two bonds of friendship—one in 1606 between the MacKinnons
and the MacNabs, in which, as being come of one house and being of one
surname, Finlay MacNab of Bowane acknowledges Lauchlan MacKinnon of
Strathardel ‘as ane kynd chieff and of ane house;’ the other somewhat
later between Lachlan MacKinnon of Strathardill and James MacGregor of
MacGregor, in which they are said to be ‘descended lawfully frae twa
brethren of auld descent.’[499] The Clan Lawren we have seen were also
descended from an abbot. The Clan _Mhic Duibhside_ or Macduffys may have
derived their name from _Duibhside_ who appears in the Annals of Ulster
in 1164 as _Ferleighinn_ or lector of Iona, and Diarmada, the
grandfather of Gillachattan, the _eponymus_ of the Clan Chattan, is said
in the old Irish genealogy to have been called the _Ferleighinn_ or
lector. Tradition attaches to Gillachattan the epithet of _Clerech_ or
Cleric, and he and his descendants the Clan Vuireach are said to have
been hereditary lay parsons of Kingussie, one of whom, Duncan the son of
Kenneth, appears in 1438 as Duncan parson. From him the chief of the
Clan Vuireach takes his name of Macpherson. The earls of Ross too
descend from the lay priests of Applecross.

[Sidenote: Result of analysis of pedigrees.]

The conclusion, then, to which this analysis of the clan pedigrees which
have been popularly accepted at different times has brought us, is, that
so far as they profess to show the origin of the different clans, they
are entirely artificial and untrustworthy, but that the older
genealogies may be accepted as showing the descent of the clan from its
eponymus or founder, and within reasonable limits for some generations
beyond him, while the later spurious pedigrees must be rejected
altogether. It may seem surprising that such spurious pedigrees and
fabulous origins should be so readily credited by the Clan families as
genuine traditions, and receive such prompt acceptance as the true fount
from which they sprung; but we must recollect that the fabulous history
of Hector Boece was as rapidly and universally adopted as the genuine
annals of the national history, and became rooted in those parts of the
country to which its fictitious events related as local traditions. When
Hector Boece invested the obscure usurper Grig with the name and
attributes of a fictitious king, Gregory the Great, and connected him
with the royal line of kings, the Clan Gregor at once recognised him as
their eponymus ancestor, and their descent from him is now implicitly
believed in by all the MacGregors. It is possible, however, from these
genealogies, and from other indications, to distribute the clans in
certain groups, as having apparently a closer connection with each
other, and these groups we hold in the main to represent the great
tribes into which the Gaelic population was divided before they became
broken up into clans. The two great tribes which possessed the greater
part of the Highlands were the _Gallgaidheal_ or Gael in the west, who
had been under the power of the Norwegians, and the great tribe of the
Moravians, or Men of Moray, in the Central and Eastern Highlands. To the
former belong all the clans descended of the Lords of the Isles, the
Campbells and Macleods probably representing the older inhabitants of
their respective districts; to the latter belong in the main the clans
brought in the old Irish genealogies from the kings of Dalriada of the
tribe of Lorn, among whom the old _Mormaers_ of Moray appear. The group
containing the Clan Andres or old Rosses, the Mackenzies and Mathesons,
belong to the tribe of Ross, the Clan Donnachy to Athole, the Clan
Lawren to Stratherne, and the Clan Pharlane to Lennox, while the group
containing the MacNabs, Clan Gregor, and MacKinnons, appear to have
emerged from Glendochart, at least to be connected with the old Columban
monasteries.[500] The Clans, properly so called, were thus of native
origin; the surnames partly of native and partly of foreign descent.

[Sidenote: Termination of Clanship in the Highlands.]

It is not much more than a century and a half since the Highland clans
combined, in the eighteenth century, to alter the dynasty of Great
Britain, and shook the stability of the throne, and since the President
of the Supreme Court laid before Government a memorial giving a detailed
statement of their names, their military strength, and the names of
their chiefs; and not much more than a hundred years later, the same
Court has been called upon to answer the question, What is a clan? and
to determine whether the word has any legal significance whatever in the
social organisation of the Highlands. In 1632, James, earl of Moray, let
the lands of Faillie and others to Donald MacGillephadrich, head of the
sept of Clan Bean, one of the sixteen tribes which made up the Clan
Chattan, for his lifetime and the lifetime of the two next heirs-male,
and for three periods of nineteen years to his heirs-male and assignees
of the Clan Chattan, and this tack was confirmed to his son Donald
MacBean. In 1771 the earl of Moray grants a feu-right of these lands to
Donald MacBean, and his heirs-male and assignees whatsoever of the said
Clan of Clan Chattan, and in the same year Donald MacBean sells the
lands to Captain William Macgillivray, the head of another of the
sixteen clans, and to his heirs and assignees of the Clan Chattan. His
son, the last of the direct line of the Macgillivrays of Dunmaglass,
died in 1852, and the question arose whether his heirs-at-law, who were
not of the clan, could succeed. In order to determine this question, the
collateral heir-male, John Macgillivray of Dunmaglass, raised an action
in the Supreme Court to have it declared that no person was entitled to
succeed to the late John Lachlan Macgillivray of Dunmaglass, who was not
a member of the Clan Chattan, but the Court held that clanship of Clan
Chattan, as a condition of heirship and a limitation of the succession
of heirs, could not be recognised or enforced by law. The Court thus
defined the modern position of a clan:—

  ‘The lapse of time and the progress of civilisation, with the
  attendant influences of settled government, regular authority, and the
  supremacy of law, have entirely obliterated the peculiar features, and
  destroyed the essential qualities and character of Scottish clanship;
  but whether they are viewed as they once were, or as they now are, a
  Court of law is equally precluded from recognising clans as existing
  institutions or societies with legal status, the membership of which
  can be inquired into or acknowledged for ascertaining the character of
  heirs called to succession.

  ‘The inquiry which the pursuer’s averments would here demand must be
  attended with extreme practical difficulty; but the recognition of a
  clan as an institution or society known to law, so that membership
  thereof shall be a quality of heirship and a condition of succession,
  is open to serious objection in point of principle.

  ‘In an earlier age, when feudal authority and irresponsible power were
  stronger than the law, and formidable to the Crown, clans and chiefs,
  with military character, feudal subordination, and internal arbitrary
  dominion, were allowed to sustain a tolerated, but not a legally
  recognised or sanctioned existence.

  ‘In more recent times clans are indeed mentioned, or recognised as
  existing, in several Acts of Parliament. But it is thought that they
  are not mentioned or recognised as institutions or societies having
  legal status, legal rights, or legal vocation or functions, but rather
  as associations of a lawless, arbitrary, turbulent, and dangerous
  character.

  ‘But nothing now remains either of the feudal power and independent
  dominion which procured sufferance in one age, or of the lawless and
  dangerous turbulence which required suppression in another. When all
  military character, all feudal subordination, all heritable
  jurisdiction, all independent authority of chiefs, are extracted from
  what used to be called a clan, nothing remains of its essential and
  peculiar features. Clans are no longer what they were. The purposes
  for which they once existed, as tolerated but not as sanctioned
  societies, are not now lawful. To all practical purposes they cannot
  legally act, and they do not legally exist. The law knows them not.
  For peaceful pageantry, social enjoyment, and family traditions,
  mention may still be made of clans and chiefs of clans; but the
  Highlands of Scotland, no longer oppressed by arbitrary sway, or
  distracted by feudal contentions, are now inhabited by loyal, orderly,
  and peaceful subjects of the Crown of Great Britain; and clans are not
  now corporations which law sustains, nor societies which law
  recognises or acknowledges.’

Such being the view of the Supreme Court of the country as to the modern
position of the clan, it remains for us to inquire how far any of the
features of the ancient tribal land tenure are still preserved in the
Highlands and Islands of Scotland.




                               CHAPTER X.

  LAND TENURE IN THE HIGHLANDS AND ISLANDS SUBSEQUENT TO THE SIXTEENTH
                                CENTURY.


[Sidenote: Changes in tenure of land.]

If the position of the clans was, as we have seen, greatly affected by
the statutes passed towards the end of the sixteenth century, the
following century witnessed the commencement of a process of change
which no less affected the position of the members of the clan as
regarded their tenure of the land, which was influenced partly by
positive enactments of the Legislature, partly by the increased efficacy
of the law of the land, which ignored all Celtic usages inconsistent
with its principles, and regarded all persons possessing a feudal title
as absolute proprietors of the land, and all occupants of the land who
could not show a right derived from the proprietor as simply yearly
tenants, and partly by changes which took place in the profitable
employment of the land.

[Sidenote: Abolition of Calps.]

The first relation which was assailed was that of the position of the
native-men and subordinate septs to the chief, and in 1617 a statute was
passed which proceeded on the narrative, that ‘his Majestie’s lieges
have sustained great hurt and skayth these many years bygone by the
chiefs of clans within the Highlands and Isles of this kingdom, by the
unlawful taking from them their children and executors after their
decease under the name of Caulpes of their best aucht whether it be on
mare, horse, or cow, alleging their predecessors to have been in
possession thereof for maintaining and defending of them against their
enemies and evil willars of old and ordained that in no time coming none
of his Highness’s lieges presume nor take on hand to intromit with nor
uplift the said Caulpis within any part of this kingdom.’[501] In the
same Parliament a statute was passed for the protection of the ‘forests
within the realm in which deer are kept, and which are altogether wasted
and decayed by sheallings, pasturing of horses, mares, cattle, oxen, and
other bestial cutting of woods within the bounds of the said forests
shooting and slaying of deer and wild fowls with hagbuttis and with dogs
in forbidden time.’[502]

[Sidenote: Size of townships.]

The land occupied by the members of the clan was divided into townships
or farms, each township consisting of a certain portion of arable land,
meadow, green pasture, and muirland. They were of various sizes, and
occupied the lower part of the country, extending in the straths or
valleys from the stream, and from the shore of the sea, and the arms of
the sea or lochs, to the ridge of the hill behind. A stone fence, called
the head-dyke, or an imaginary line answering to it ran along the brae
or slope, and separated the arable, meadow-ground, and pasture of the
milch cows from the muirland or hill pasture, where the horses,
yeld-cattle, and sheep of the farm ranged. The arable land of the
township which lay within the head-dyke was usually divided into infield
and outfield. In the former the steading, or town as it was called, was
situated, and it was kept in tillage, on which all the manure was laid.
The outfield consisted of such plots at the bottom of the valleys as
were level enough and free of wood or stones to be ploughed, and were
kept in corn and lea alternately, the cattle being folded upon them for
manure called tathing. The meadows were patches among the fields, too
wet, woody, or stony, to be ploughed, and kept under scythe and sickle
for a scanty supply of hay; while the faces of the braes, roots of the
hills, woody or stony wastes at the bottom, with a small plot near the
house, termed the door-land, for baiting horses, were kept as pasture
for cattle in summer and sheep in winter; while the sheep and horses
were pastured during summer on the muirland or hill pasture, which lay
immediately above the head-dyke, and contiguous to the green
pasture-grounds.

[Sidenote: Occupation of townships.]

These farms or townships were occupied in three different ways. They
were either possessed by the tacksmen or goodmen themselves, in which
case they kept on them a number of cottars, to each of whom they gave a
house, grass for a cow or two, and as much ground as would sow about a
boll of oats; or they were possessed by sub-tenants, to whom the
tacksmen sub-let the whole or a part of the farm, or else they were held
direct from the proprietor in joint tenancy by a number of tenants.
These tenants and sub-tenants formed a sort of village community, having
their houses together, holding the arable land in runrig, which was
divided annually by lot among them, and the pasture land in common, each
tenant being entitled to pasture a certain number of cattle, sheep, and
horses, in proportion to his share of the arable land, which was termed
his souming and rouming. In most cases the land was held on what was
called a steelbow tenure, when the stock on the farm was the property of
the landlord or tacksman, and was let along with the land, and at the
end of the lease the tenant or sub-tenant had to return an equal amount
of stock or pay the difference. In the Western Isles there was also a
kind of tenancy called half-foot, where the possessor of the farm
furnished the land and seed-corn, and the other party cultivated the
land, the produce being divided.

[Sidenote: Average size of township in Central Highlands.]

In the central Highlands the average township consisted of about 90
acres within the head-dyke, of which 20 acres were infield, 15 acres
outfield, 10 acres meadow, 35 acres green pasture, and 10 acres woody
waste; and the muirland beyond the head-dyke 250 acres. The smaller
township contained within the head-dyke 5 acres infield, 4 acres
outfield, 2½ acres meadow, 20 acres green pasture, 2½ acres waste, and
beyond the head-dyke 75 acres of muirland or hill pasture.

[Sidenote: Township in the Islands.]

In the Islands the township usually consisted of what was called a penny
land, but occasionally of the halfpenny land, termed Leffen
(_Lethphein_). These penny lands, however, were of different sizes. Thus
of three penny lands on the south side of Loch Scriden, in the island of
Mull, one consisted of 64 acres of infield arable land, 16 of outfield
arable, 19 of green pasture, and 497 of hill pasture; another contained
106 acres of infield arable land, 44 acres of outfield arable, 19 acres
of green pasture, and 704 of hill pasture and the third consisted of 68
acres of infield arable land, 27 of outfield arable, 29 of green
pasture, and 872 of hill pasture. This latter township was occupied by
eight tenants, each pasturing twelve cows, with their followers.[503]

[Sidenote: Highland deer-forests.]

The great mountain ranges and the groups of larger hills either formed
deer-forests or lay waste, and within their bounds were shealings or
summer pasture attached to farms, when the contiguous muir was not
sufficient for hill stock in summer, and here the cows were brought in
summer and kept for six or seven weeks.[504] The peat-mosses furnished
the tenants of the farms with their fuel.

The principal deer-forests were to be found in the two great mountain
ranges of the Mounth, which extended across the island from the eastern
to the western sea, and Drumalban, or the backbone of Scotland, which
divided the eastern from the western waters. These forests existed from
time immemorial. Thus we find that in 1630 the earldom of Atholl was
granted by Charles I. to John, earl of Atholl, with the free forest of
Bynzecromby, and all the other free forests of the earldom, the office
of forester, and the privileges of the same; and in the Acts of
Parliament a statute regarding a forest in the latter range in 1662,
when Parliament ratifies a charter granted by King James the Sixth in
1617, constituting the Campbells of Glenurchay heritable foresters and
keepers of the forests and woods of Mamlorne, Berinakansauche _alias_
Bendaskerlie, Finglenbeg and Finglenmor; and in order to protect the
forest more effectually they have power to escheat or forfeit all
horses, mares, kyne, sheep, goats, swine, and other cattle and bestials
that shall be found in any time coming feeding within the said woods and
forests, or any part of the bounds thereof.[505]

In the year 1695 a statute was passed to abolish the system of holding
land in runrig,[506] but it was so expressed as to apply only to cases
of joint proprietary of the runrig lands, and not to that of a joint
tenancy, as was the case in these Highland townships.

[Sidenote: Causes affecting the population in the eighteenth century.]

In the following century the social position of the Gaelic population in
the Highlands and Islands became affected by several causes. These were
in the main the introduction of sheep-farming and emigration of the
people from various districts; the increased manufacture of kelp; the
extension of the culture of the potato, and the system of crofting. When
the cessation of these causes, which had kept the Highlands distinct
from the rest of the country, brought all classes into contact with a
different and more advanced state of society, and the old feudal
relations of superior and dependant gradually passed into those of
proprietor and tenant, the natural consequence was, from the conversion
of services and the different estimate of the relative value of land and
people, that the rents were everywhere raised; and this gave rise to the
extensive emigration of those who were unwilling to submit to or could
not find a place in the new system. Then followed the more profitable
occupation of the hill pasture under sheep stock, and the introduction
of sheep-farming. The farms held by the tacksmen were very generally
converted into sheep-farms, and new ones were created, as opportunity
offered, by throwing the townships occupied by the joint tenants into
larger farms, and adding extensive ranges of hill pasture to them. So
far as the latter was concerned, the placing under sheep of extensive
ranges of hill country which had previously either lain waste or been
occupied as deer-forests, had no effect upon the population; but it
became necessary to remove the small tenants, in order to convert their
holdings into wintering for the sheep, and this led to a large portion
of the population being dispossessed.[507] The emigration of the people
which had been created by these causes was checked by the American war,
but recommenced to even a greater extent after the peace, and continued
till the passing of the Emigration Act in 1803. As this emigration had
generally consisted of entire families, and many of the tacksmen were
accompanied by their dependants, and thus, as the large farms were
introduced on the one hand, the dispossessed population emigrated on the
other, there was nothing in the change of policy, whether it was
desirable in itself or not, which was not in accordance with the
principles of social economy, so far as population is concerned. It is
estimated that of those who were dispossessed from the sheep-farming,
two-thirds emigrated in the beginning of the present century. Various
circumstances led, however, to a check being then given to emigration,
one principal cause of which was the new source of wealth to the
proprietors, and of employment to the population of those districts
bordered by the sea and of the Islands, which arose from the increased
manufacture of kelp. This manufacture was first introduced so far back
as the year 1734, but did not rise into notice till the American war,
when kelp reached the remunerating price of £8 per ton. After the
termination of that war the price fell, owing to competition in barilla
and potash, and kelp was manufactured to but a limited extent till the
present century, when it again rose into importance, and had reached in
1806 an average price of £16 per ton, and in 1808, 1809, and 1810 the
enormous price of £22 per ton. The increased profits arising from this
manufacture caused a great demand for labour, and created a powerful
interest in all classes engaged in it to encourage population. At the
same time, as it only afforded employment during two months in summer,
and, from its being a great object to bring a large quantity as quickly
as possible to market, demanded a large amount of labour at one season
of the year only, an additional resource was found in the potato,
introduced in 1743, but cultivated to a limited extent till this period,
when its culture extended as rapidly as the manufacture of kelp had
increased, until it became the principal means of subsistence of a large
portion of the population.

[Sidenote: Townships in the Inner Hebrides in 1850.]

The increase of the population, and the extension of the culture of the
potato which accompanied it, may be illustrated from the statistics of
one parish in Skye. The population of this parish in 1801 was 2555. In
1841 it had increased to 3625. In 1801 the produce of the parish
consisted of 1600 bolls of oats and bere, and of 5000 barrels of
potatoes. In 1841,1618 bolls of grain and 32,000 barrels of potatoes.
Thus, while the population showed an increase of 1070, the produce of
the cereal crops had undergone little change during the forty years
preceding 1841; but the cultivation of the potato had increased sixfold,
and consequently furnished the sole additional production to meet the
requirements of the additional population.

The crofting system was first introduced by the arable portion of the
small farms or townships previously held in common and cultivated in
runrig, being permanently divided among the joint-tenants in separate
crofts, the pasture remaining in common. This, though an improvement
with reference to the cultivation of the farm, was unfortunately not
accompanied by any practical guarantee against subdividing, by the
security of leases, or by the encouragement and attention which the
crofters required. The previous system, where the arable land was held
in joint-tenancy, though necessarily implying a low state of
agriculture, yet afforded some guarantees in the joint-interest created
by it against subdivision; but when the employment afforded by the
manufacture of kelp became the principal dependence of all classes, and
the cultivation of the land of secondary importance, the comparative
independence of the tenants on each other, which resulted from the
possession of separate crofts, afforded fatal facilities for subdivision
and sub-letting, which were carried to a great extent. This result was
likewise increased by separate lotting on the part of the proprietors or
of those in the management of their estates. The Fencible regiments had
been raised, in many cases, on a promise to give lots or possessions to
the recruits, and, when disbanded, these promises had to be redeemed. A
system of general and indiscriminate lotting was introduced and carried
on, by which separate lots were provided for the population as they
pressed still more upon the land, while the employment afforded by the
kelp and the increased culture of the potato provided a resource for
their occupants. The tendency of all this was greatly to increase the
cottar class, who were sub-tenants under the tacksmen and small tenants,
their labour being usually taken in place of rent, in return for the
lots they held; but with a limited potato-culture and no extraordinary
demand for labour, this class had hitherto not been very numerous. Other
circumstances still further tended to add to this class of the
community. The British Fishery Society had established in 1788 the
fishing villages of Tobermory, Ullapool, Stein, and others, with a view
of prosecuting a permanent fishing trade; and proprietors had followed
their example in setting similar communities on the sea-coast as a
resource for the dispossessed population. Small lots, generally about
two acres, were given to the proposed fishermen, but these villages
failed in the main from various causes, and formed a refuge for the
dispossessed population of neighbouring properties, till they furnished
examples of the poorest class of lotters or cottars. The extension of
the large farms and the removal of the former occupants of the land
unaccompanied by emigration—the Highland clearing in the proper sense of
the term—necessarily added to the numbers of the same class, and any
subsequent enforced emigration was too often of a character which not
only did nothing to reduce the numbers of this class, but rather tended
to aggravate the evil, as the families it removed were generally of the
better class of small tenantry able to provide some part of the cost of
transit, while the land they occupied was at the same time withdrawn
from cultivation, and those of its occupants who did not emigrate were
necessarily thrown upon the cottar population.

Such was the position of the population, when the manufacture of kelp,
after proving a source of wealth and employment, ceased to be so
remunerative after the repeal of the salt-duty in 1817, and was finally
prostrated under the competition produced by the reduction of the duty
on barilla. The people had become to a great extent dependent on the
potato for a considerable portion of the year, and the employment
afforded by the kelp supplied the period between the consumption of the
potato crop of one year and that of the succeeding crop. All classes
appear to have forgotten that the profits of the kelp manufacture were
not the legitimate produce of the land, on which they could depend as
proprietors and tenants, but that they were in fact engaged in a
manufacture subject to the fluctuations of trade arising from the state
of the market, and might be placed in the same position as a
manufacturing population during one of the periodical stagnations of
trade. The sudden withdrawal of this resource left the main part of the
Highland population in a similar situation, except that they had become
rooted to the soil and confirmed in habits which unfitted them to meet
the crisis. A considerable portion of the population disclosed the
appearance of a parasite class, pressing largely upon the means of
subsistence and the resources of others, and the cottars having lost the
resource of the kelp became exposed to an annual destitution during the
period which intervened between the consumption of the produce of each
potato crop, until the partial failure of that crop in the years
1836-37, and the more extensive destruction of it in 1847 and three
succeeding years, reduced a large portion of the population to a state
of absolute destitution for the time, and brought their social position
prominently under the notice of all classes of the community.

The statistics of the same parish in Skye will afford a fair
illustration of their position during the failure of the potato crop.
The parish consisted then of 4826 acres of arable land, 4339 of green
pasture, and 37,305 of hill pasture. There were four large farms
containing about 1200 acres of arable land, and on these farms there
were twenty-five families of cottars. The remaining 3676 acres of arable
land were distributed among thirty-seven townships held by 334 families
of crofters; and upon these 334 families of crofters there was a
parasite population of 300 families of cottars. The particulars of two
of these townships will show still more clearly the state of the
population at this time. One, consisting of 205 acres, was held by nine
tenants, whose families amounted to forty-three persons. Of these 205
acres, 42 were under cultivation, the usual produce of which was
sixty-one bolls. They had twenty-four cows, sixteen sheep, and six
horses, and the total rent paid by them was £84, and upon this farm
there were besides ten families of cottars, giving a population of
eighty-six souls on a farm paying only £84 of rent. Another township
contained 161 acres, and was held by four families of croft tenants.
There were only 22 acres under cultivation, yielding on an average
thirty-two bolls. They had eight cows, twenty-one sheep, and four
horses, and paid £55 of rent, and on this farm were seven families of
cottars. In another parish in the same island, a township paying £68 of
rent was held by twenty-two families of crofter tenants, while there
were located in the township no fewer than twenty-five families of
cottars, giving a population of 250 souls dependent on the produce of
the ground for subsistence.[508]

[Sidenote: Existing townships in the Outer Hebrides.]

It might, however, be expected that the features of the older state of
the occupants of the soil would be longer preserved in the Outer
Hebrides where there was less intercourse with the mainland, and an
account of the present state of some of the townships in the Long Island
has been kindly communicated for this work by Mr. Alexander Carmichael,
a gentleman who has been long resident among them, and is intimately
acquainted with their condition, which will furnish an appropriate
conclusion to this chapter.

‘Old systems are tenacious. They linger long among a rural people, and
in remote places. Of these is the land system of runrig (_Mor Earann_),
which characterises more or less the land system of some of the Western
Isles (Innsi-Gall). The Outer Hebrides are called the Long Island
(_Eileann Fada_, _Innis Fada_). They are a series of islands 119 miles
in length, and varying from half-a-mile to twenty miles in breadth. This
kite-like chain of 40 inhabited and upwards of 150 uninhabited islands
contains a population of 40,000. Much of the land is held by extensive
tacksmen on leases (_Fir-Baile_), and, there being no intermediate
tenantry, the rest of the land is occupied by small tenants at will
without leases. These number 4500, the majority of whom fish as well as
farm.

‘The country is divided into townlands of various extent. The arable
land (Fearann grainsich) occupied by the small tenants of these
townlands is worked in three ways—as crofts wholly, as crofts and runrig
combined, and as runrig wholly. In Lewis and Harris the arable land is
wholly divided into crofts; in Uist and Barra the arable land is
divided, in part into crofts, and in part worked in runrig; while in the
townlands of Hosta, Caolas Paipil, and the island of Heisgeir in North
Uist, the arable land is worked exclusively upon the runrig system of
share and share alike. The grazing ground of the tenants of each
townland throughout the Long Island is held in common (in Lewis called
_Comhpairt_).

‘The soil varies from pure sand to pure moss. Along the Atlantic there
is a wide plain of sandy soil called _Machair_. This merges into a
mixture of sand and moss (_Breacthalamh_, or mottled soil), which again
merges into the pure moss (_Mointeach_) towards the Minch. As the soil
is dry and sandy, if the summer is dry the crop is light. On the other
hand, if the summer is moist the crop is heavy and good. In order that
all may have an equal chance, the _Machair_ belonging to them is equally
divided among the tenants of the township. Obviously the man who is
restricted to his croft has fewer advantages than the man who, together
with his croft, has his share of the _Machair_, and still fewer
advantages than the man who has, rig for rig with his neighbours, the
run of the various soils of his townland, which gives name to the
system. Consequently, a wet or a dry season affects the tenant of the
croft system more than the tenant of the combined system, and the tenant
of the combined system more than the tenant of the runrig system.

‘The townland of Hosta is occupied by four, Caolas Paipil by six, and
the island of Heisgeir by twelve tenants. Towards the end of autumn,
when harvest is over, and the fruits of the year have been gathered in,
the constable (_Constabal_, _Foirfeadeach_) calls a meeting of the
tenants of the townland for Nabachd (preferably _Nabuidheachd_,
neighbourliness). They meet, and having decided upon the portion of land
(_Leob_, _Clar_) to be put under green crop next year, they divide it
into shares according to the number of tenants in the place, and the
number of shares in the soil they respectively possess. Thereupon they
cast lots (_Crannachuradh_, _Cur chrann_, _Tilgeadh chrann_,
_Crannadh_), and the share which falls to a tenant he retains for three
years. A third of the land under cultivation is thus divided every year.
Accordingly, the whole cultivated land of the townland undergoes
redivision every three years. Should a man get a bad share he is allowed
to choose his share in the next division. The tenants divide the land
into shares of uniform size. For this purpose they use a rod several
yards long, and they observe as much accuracy in measuring their land as
a draper in measuring his cloth. In marking the boundary between shares,
a turf (_Torc_) is dug up and turned over along the line of demarcation.
The ‘torc’ is then cut along the middle, and half is taken by the tenant
on one side and half by the tenant on the other side, in ploughing the
subsequent furrow; similar care being afterwards exercised in cutting
the corn along the furrow. The tenant’s portion of the runrig is termed
Cianag and his proportion of the grazing for every pound he pays
Coir-sgoraidh.

‘There are no fences round the fields. The crop being thus exposed to
injury from the cattle grazing along the side, the people leave a
protecting rig on the margin of the crop. This rig is divided
transversely into shares, in order to subject all the tenants to equal
risk. The rig is called indiscriminately _Iomair ionailt_ browsing rig,
_Iomair a chruidh_ the cattle rig, and _Iomaire comachaidh_ the
promiscuous rig. The arrangement is named _Comachadh_, promiscuous.
Occasionally and for limited bits of ground, the people till, sow, and
reap in common, and divide the produce into shares (_Rainn_,
_Ranntaichean_) and draw lots. This too is called _Comachadh_,
promiscuous. The system was not uncommon in the past, though now nearly
obsolete.

‘In making their own land arrangements for the year, the tenants set
apart a piece of ground towards the support of their poor. This ground
is called _Cianag nam bochd_, the _Cianag_ of the poor, and _Talamh nam
bochd_, the ground of the poor. Farm produce given to the poor who go
about when the crop is being secured is termed _Feigh_, _Faigh_, or
_Faoigh_. The produce for which the suppliant travels denotes the nature
of the _Faoigh_ or aid, as _Faoigh cloimh_ wool-aid, _Faoigh arair_
corn-aid, or _Faoigh buntata_ potato-aid.

‘In reclaiming moorland (_Mointeach_, _Sliahb_, _Riasg_), the tenants
divide the ground into narrow strips of five feet wide or thereby. These
strips, called lazy-beds (_Feann-agan_, from _Feann_ to scarify), the
tenants allot among themselves according to their shares or crofts. The
people mutually encourage one another to plant as much of this ground as
possible. In this manner much waste land is reclaimed and enhanced in
value, and ground hitherto the home of the stonechat, grouse, snipe, and
sundew, is made to yield luxuriant crops of potatoes, corn, hay, and
grass. Not unfrequently, however, these land-reclamations are wrested
without acknowledgment from those who made them.

‘The sheep, cattle, and horses of the townland (_Spreidh a bhaile_)
graze together, the species being separate. A tenant can only keep stock
conformably to his share in the soil. He is, however, at liberty to
regulate the proportions of the different kinds, provided that his total
stock does not exceed his total grazing rights. He may keep a larger
number of one species and a corresponding smaller number of another. Or
he can keep a greater number of the young and a corresponding less
number of the old of the same species, or the reverse. About
Whitsuntide, when the young braird appears, the people remove their
sheep and cattle to the grazing ground behind the arable land
(_Gearruidh_, _Culcinn_, _Sliabh_, or _Beinn_). This is called clearing
the townland, and is variously termed in various districts—_Reiteach a
bhaile_, _Glanadh a bhaile_, _Fuadach_, _Cartadh_, _Cusgaradh_,
_Cursgaradh_, _Usgaradh_, and _Ursgaradh_. The tenants bring forward
their stock (_Leibhidh_), and a souming (_Sumachadh_) is made. The
_Leibhidh_ is the amount of the tenant’s stock, the _Sumachadh_ the
number he is entitled to graze in common with his neighbours. Should the
tenant have a croft, he is probably able to graze some extra stock
thereon, though this is demurred to by his neighbours. Each penny
(_Peighinn_) of arable land has grazing rights of so many soums.
Neither, however, is the extent of land in the “penny” nor the number of
animals in the soum uniformly the same. The soum (_Sum_, _Suim_)
consists of a cow with her progeny (_Bo le h-al_).[509] Conformably to
the code of one district this includes only the cow and her calf, and
according to the Gaelic distich the calf becomes a stirk at All-Hallows—

              _La Samhna theirear gamhna ris na laoigh,
              La ‘Illeain theirear aidhean riu na dheigh_.

              At Hallowmas the calf is called a stirk aye,
              At Saint John’s the stirk becomes a quey.

‘In another district the soum (_Bo le h-al_) means the cow and her three
immediate descendants—the calf, the one-year-old stirk, and the
two-year-old quey.

‘In a third district the soum or _Bo le h-al_ comprehends five animals,
viz., the cow, her calf, her one-year-old stirk, her two-year-old quey,
and her three-year-old heifer. When the calf has attained four years of
age it is ousted from the soum and classed with the cows.

‘The people conform to their code in equalising their stock. Different
species of animals are placed against one another, and the same species
at different ages. This is called _Coilpeachadh_, equalising. The
grazing equivalents of a cow are eight calves, four one-year-old stirks,
two two-year-old queys, one three-year-old heifer, and one stirk, eight
sheep, twelve hoggs,[510] sixteen lambs, or, sixteen geese. The grazing
equivalents of the horse are eight foals, four one-year-old fillies, two
two-year-old fillies, one three-year-old, and one one-year-old filly, or
two cows. The horse is deemed to have arrived at grazing maturity at
four years of age. Three one-year-old hoggs are considered equal in
grazing to two sheep, and one two-year-old hogg is deemed equal to one
sheep. The cow is entitled to her calf. Should a tenant have two cows
without calves, the cows are entitled to get one one-year-old stirk or
its equivalent along with them. And, should he have four cows without
calves, the cows claim two one-year-old queys, or their equivalents.

‘If the stock, or soum, of a tenant be complete, it is termed _Leibhidh
slan_ and _Sumachadh slan_, that is, whole _Leibhidh_ and whole soum,
and _Fiar slan_, or whole grass. The animals which go to complete the
stock or soum are called _Slanuich_, _Slanuichean_, completers. Should
the stock or soum be incomplete, it is _Leibhidh briste_, broken stock;
_Sumachadh briste_, broken soum, or _Fiar briste_, _Bristiar_, broken
grass. The odd animals beyond the complete stock or soum are _Bristich_,
_Bristichean_, or _Beacha briste_, broken beasts.

‘In the event of a tenant having an overstock (_Barr leibhe_), or an
oversoum (_Barr-suma_, _Barr-suime_), he must provide for it
independently. He may buy grazing from a neighbour in his own or
contiguous townland who has an understock (_Gior-leibhe_), or an
undersoum (_Gior-suime_), or the community may allow the overstock to
remain on the grass till he can dispose of it. If the latter, payment of
the grazing of the extra animals is exacted according to their code. The
amount is paid over to the fund of the community, which is used for the
common good towards buying fresh stock, bulls, tups, or for some such
purpose.

‘The souming is amended at Lammas (_Lunastain_), after the first markets
are held, and re-amended at Hallowtide, after the last markets are over,
when the final and winter arrangements are made.

‘In Lewis and Harris the crofters keep stock according to every pound of
rent they pay. This system is termed _Cosgarradh_, evidently
_Coir-sgoraidh_, the right of grazing.

‘There being no fences to protect the fields, during summer and autumn
the herds are placed at night in enclosures to secure them against
trespassing on the crop. The enclosure for horses is called _Marclan_,
_Comhlong_; for cattle, _Buaile_, _Cuithe_; for sheep, _Cro_, _Fang_,
_Faing_; for goats, _Mainnir_, _Cro_; and for calfs and lambs, _Cotan_.

‘Lest any of these should break loose and damage the corn, two men watch
the folds together at night. This duty is called _Cuartachadh_ rounding
the folds, and devolves upon two of the tenants in rotation. Should the
watchers become remiss towards the dawn, when the herds begin to move,
some of the animals may break through the enclosure and cause loss. If
so, the two tenants are held liable, and are required to make reparation
(_Dioladh_). The damage is appraised by the constable, who is sworn to
do justice, and in this capacity is termed _Foirfeidach_, the just one,
or _Measaiche_, the valuator. The constable’s valuation is held final,
unless he should be interested, when the eldest tenant takes his place.

‘The crofters have a code of regulations, for which, if broken,
reparation is made. Should a crofter’s horse break loose, or his fowls
stray, and so destroy a neighbour’s corn, the injury is valued and the
amount paid into the common fund. All fines and reparations (_Cain_,
_Dioladh_) are paid over to this fund, or used for the common good. The
crofter paying the fine does not lose all interest therein, nor does the
crofter to whom reparation is made derive the exclusive benefit
therefrom. This reparation is exacted by the farm constable in his
official capacity as representing the crofters of the farm as a
body.[511]

‘Having finished their tillage, the people go early in June to the
hill-grazing with their flocks. This is a busy day in the townland. The
people are up and in commotion like bees about to swarm. The different
families bring their herds together and drive them away. The sheep lead,
the cattle go next, the younger preceding, and the horses follow. The
men carry burdens of sticks, heather, ropes, spades, and other things
needed to repair their summer huts (_Sgitheil_, _Bothain_). The women
carry bedding, meal, dairy and cooking utensils. Round below their
waists is a thick woollen cord or leathern strap (_Crios-fheile_,
kilt-band), underneath which their skirts are drawn up to enable them to
walk easily over the moors. Barefooted, bareheaded, comely boys and
girls, with gaunt sagacious dogs, flit hither and thither, keeping the
herds together as best they can, and every now and then having a
neck-and-neck race with some perverse animal trying to run away home.
There is much noise. Men—several at a time—give directions and scold.
Women knit their stockings, sing their songs, talk and walk as free and
erect as if there were no burdens on their backs nor on their hearts,
nor sin nor sorrow in this world of ours, so far as they are concerned.
Above this din rise the voices of the various animals being thus
unwillingly driven from their homes. Sheep bleet for their lambs, lambs
for their mothers; cows low for their calves, and calves low for their
dams; mares neigh for their foals, and foals reply as they lightly trip
round about, little thinking of coming work and hard fare. All who meet
on the way bless the trial, as this removing is called. They wish it
good luck and prosperity, and a good flitting day, and, having invoked
the care of Israel’s Shepherd on man and beast, they pass on.

‘When the grazing-ground has been reached and the burdens are laid down,
the huts are repaired outwardly and inwardly, the fires are rekindled,
and food is prepared. The people bring forward their stock, every man’s
stock separately, and, as they are being driven into the enclosure, the
constable and another man at either side of the gateway see that only
the proper souming has been brought to the grazing. This precaution
over, the cattle are turned out to graze.

‘Having seen to their cattle and sorted their shealings, the people
repair to their removing feast (_Feisd na h-imrig_ or shealing feast,
_Feisd na h-airidh_). The feast is simple enough, the chief thing being
a cheese, which every housewife is careful to provide for the occasion
from last year’s produce. The cheese is shared among neighbours and
friends, as they wish themselves and cattle luck and prosperity.

             (‘_Laoigh bhailgionn boirionn air gach fireach
             Piseach crodh na h-airidh_.)

‘Every head is uncovered, every knee is bowed, as they dedicate
themselves and their flocks to the care of Israel’s Shepherd.

‘In Barra, South Uist, and Benbecula, the Roman Catholic faith
predominates; here, in their touching dedicatory old hymn, the people
invoke with the aid of the Trinity, that of the angel with the cornered
shield and flaming sword, Saint Michael, the patron saint of their
horses; of Saint Columba the holy, the guardian over their cattle, and
of the golden-haired Virgin Shepherdess, and Mother of the Lamb without
spot or blemish.

‘In North Uist, Harris, and Lewis, the Protestant faith entirely
prevails, and the people confine their invocation to,

                  ‘The Shepherd that keeps Israel,
                  He slumbereth not nor sleepeth.

                  (‘_Feuch air Fear Coimhead Israeil,
                  Codal cha’n aom no suain_.)

As the people sing their dedication, their voices resound from their
shealings, here literally in the wilderness, and as the music floats on
the air, and echoes among the rocks, hills, and glens, and is wafted
over fresh-water lakes and sea-lochs, the effect is very striking.

‘The walls of the shealings in which the people live are of turf, the
roof of sticks covered with divots. There are usually two shealings
together; the larger the dwelling, the smaller the dairy. This style of
hut (Sgithiol) is called _Airidh_ or shealing, and _Both cheap_, or
_Bothan cheap_, turf bothy; to distinguish it from the _Both cloiche_ or
_Bothan cloiche_, stone bothy. This is entirely constructed of stone,
the roof tapering to a cone more or less pointed. The apex of the cone
roof is probably finished off with a flag, through the centre of which
there is a hole like that through an upper millstone, the opening for
the egress of smoke and the ingress of light. There is a low doorway
with a removable door, seldom used, made of wicker-work, wattles,
heather, or bent. In the walls of the hut, two, three, or four feet from
the floor, are recesses for the various utensils in use by the people,
while in the bosom of the thick wall low down near the ground are the
dormitories wherein the people sleep. The entrance to these dormitories,
slightly raised above the floor, is a small hole, barely capable of
admitting a person to creep through. This sleeping-place is called
_Crupa_, from _Crupadh_, to crouch. It was a special feature in the
architecture of the former houses of St. Kilda, the houses themselves
being called _Crupa_ from this characteristic. These beehive houses are
still the shealings of the Lewis people. Invariably two or three strong
healthy girls share the same shealing. Here they remain making butter
and cheese till the corn is ripe for shearing, when they and their
cattle return home. The people enjoy this life at the hill pasturage,
and many of the best lyric songs in their language are in praise of the
loved summer shealing.

‘A tenant is liable for his own rent only. Formerly the rent was paid in
four different ways. The first part was paid in money, the second in
meal, the third in butter and cheese (_Annlann_), and the fourth part in
cattle fit for selling or killing (_Crodh creic_, _Creiche_, _no
Seiche_). In Uist, where kelp (_Ceilp_) is made, the kelp is placed to
the credit for rent of the tenants who make it. There was also a system
of labour. The people gave so many days’ work, the days being divided in
certain proportions between the four seasons of the year. When the land
was held direct from the proprietor the labour was called _Morlanachd_,
occasionally _Borlanachd_. Probably this term is from _Mur_ a fortress
and _Lann_ an enclosure. This system of labour may have had its origin
in return for the shelter the enclosed fortress of the chief afforded
the people in time of danger. When the land was held under the tacksman
or middleman, and indirectly from the proprietor, the labour was called
_Cairiste_, from _Caithris_, unrest, a word sufficiently indicative of
the mode of its exaction.

‘The shepherd, cattle-herd, and march-keeper (_Coimheadaidh_,
_Criochaire_, _Fear coimhid_) are paid in kind, invariably in seaweed,
land, and grazing. This mode of payment is called _Fairthadh_. The term
is also applied to corn, meal, or potatoes, given to men-servants in
payment of wages, and also to bits of extra tillage granted by their
neighbours to help poor tenants. In parts of Lewis the term is applied
to the ground set apart for the poor.

‘The shepherd, as his name implies, tends the sheep, the cattle-herd the
cattle, and the march-keeper, grass-keeper, or watcher, watches the open
marches of the townland to prevent trespass. Having no interest in the
matter, the march-keeper is often sent out from the people to call out
the lots. The watcher may also be required to act as perchman
(_Peursair_, or shoreherd, _Buachaille cladaich_). His duty is to erect
a pole, on the top of which is a bundle of seaweed (Gaelic, _Topan
todhair_) to indicate that the seaware is on the shore. When the people
see the raised sign they hasten to the shore with their horses and
carts, and creels, to land the spoils of the sea to put life in the land
(_an tabhartas todhair a chuireas beatha an talamh,—an tabhartas todhair
chuireas cobhair an uir_,—the seaweed offering that feeds the land). No
tenant is permitted to take seaweed till his neighbours have time to
arrive. Occasionally the sea-weed is divided into pennies, and lots
drawn for the different shares, as for land.

‘The people adhere to their traditional code, and if this be
transgressed in any part reparation is exacted. If a tenant, through
carelessness, allows his horse to go loose, he is amerced in a fine
(_Cain_). The fine is exacted where no damage results. The shepherd,
cattle-herd, and watcher are subject to the same rigorous exactions if
they allow injury to the crop.

‘The proprietor is represented on the estate by a factor (_Bailidh_). In
Lewis the factor is called Chamberlain. The factor is represented by a
_Maor_ in every district, and the _Maor_ by a constable in every
townland. The factor communicates with his _Maors_, the _Maors_ with
their constables, who communicate with the tenants of their townlands.
The people, however, are allowed to apply their own customs
(_Cleachdna_) in working their land, and their own regulations
(_Riaghailt_) in managing their stock. The _Cleachdadh_ is their
unwritten law, the _Riaghailt_ their unwritten regulations; and to these
they are attached as the result of experience and the wisdom of their
fathers. The _Cleachdadh_ and _Riaghailt_ differ in different parishes,
and occasionally in different districts of the same parish. The closer
the runrig system is followed, the more are these customs and
regulations observed. The more intelligent tenants regret a departure
from them. The people defer to the wishes of the many as against the
wisdom of the few, and obey the decision of the majority.

‘When required by the proprietor or the people, the constable convenes a
meeting of the tenants. If the constable presides, the meeting is
_Nabac_; if the _Maor_ presides, the council is the more important,
_Mod_ or moot. Perhaps the people have met to confer about making or
repairing a district road (_Utraid_), the digging or deepening of a
ditch, or trench (_Dig_), the planting or repairing with bent (_Muran_)
the drifting sandbanks of their _Machair_, or the buying or selling of a
bull. The man who presides explains the business, and makes a motion. If
the people assent, the matter is decided; if not, discussion ensues.
Some of the people speak well. They reason forcibly, illustrate
fittingly, and show complete mastery over their native Gaelic, which
with them is plastic, copious, and expressive. Everything calculated to
mar neighbourliness is discountenanced. Reasoning, they say, shall
obtain hearing, and sooner or later victory; but the most contemptible
of contemptible things are doggedliness and vulgar abuse (_Ghiobh
comhdach buaidh agus luath no mall eisdeachd, ach diubhaidh dubh an
domhain, coinealachd agus graisgealachd_). Nevertheless, personalities
occur, offensive allusions and remarks are made, even the proprietor’s
representative in the second or third degree removed being not always
treated with immunity, though always with respect. When contention is
imminent, the people of the townland, and possibly of other townlands,
come to hear. The council meet on a knoll at the house of the _Maor_ or
the constable. The subject is decided by votes. Those who approve go
sunwise to the south and to the right of the official presiding; while
those who disapprove go sunwise to the north and to the left of the
representative. These directions are symbolic—the one being propitious,
the other unpropitious. Should the votes be equal, lots are drawn three
times—the two times carrying against the one time. If a man holds out
against his neighbours, perhaps faithful amongst the faithless, he is
reproached as _aon an aghaidh pobuill_, one against people, and is
derisively addressed as _Fiacill gaibhre_, goat-tooth.

‘Highlanders are essentially monarchical in their economic institutions
and social tendencies. In this they say they but follow the example or
instincts of the lower animals, all of which follow their chief. The
leader of the herd or flock is called _Ceannard_, _Ceann-iuil_, but more
frequently _Snaodaire_. The leader of the horses is _Ceannmarc_,
_Ceannmharc_, _Marccheann_; of the cattle, _Ceannabha_, _Ceannabhoin_,
_Boinecheann_; _ceannnith_; of the sheep, _Ceannciora_, _Cioracheann_;
of the goats, _Ceannabhoc_, _Ceann-gaibhre_, _Ceannaghabhar_,
_Gabhar-cheann_; of the swine, _Ceann-cula_, _Cula-cheann_,
_Speile-cheann_; of the deer, _Ceanna-ghreigh_, _Grecheann_; of birds,
_Ceann-ianlainn_, _Iala-cheann_, _Iolcheann_; and of the fish,
_Ceann-snaoth_. _Ceann-snaoth_ is particularly applied to the salmon, as
_Ceann snaoth an eisg_, the leader of the fish, which is also called
_Righ nan iasg_, the king of the fish. The eagle is called _Righ nan
ian_, the king of the birds, and _Righ na h-ealtain_, king of the bird
universe. The eagle is also termed _Firein_, true bird, _an t-ian_, the
bird par excellence. _Firein_ is a symbolic name applied to a Christian.

‘The leader of the herd is the first to rise and the last to lie down,
and even when asleep would seem to be awake. A male is not necessarily
the leader. Among cattle this position is often assumed by a cow.

                    ‘_An te is urranta dhe’n chrodh
                    Is i ghiobh a bhuaidh_.

                    ‘The ablest of the cows
                    Achieving victory.

But whether male or female the leader is the least despotic animal in
the herd, the most contemptible being invariably the most despotic.

‘The houses of the tenants form a cluster (_Gnigne_, _Grigne_,
_Griogsa_, _Creaga_, _Carigean_). In parts of Lewis the houses are in
straight line called _Straid_, street, occasionally from one to three
miles in length. They are placed in a suitable part of the townland, and
those of the tenants of the runrig system are warm, good, and
comfortable. These tenants carry on their farming operations
simultaneously, and not without friendly and wholesome rivalry, the
enterprise of one stimulating the zeal of another.

‘Not the least pleasing feature in this semi-family system is the
assistance rendered by his neighbours to a tenant whose work has fallen
behind through accident, sickness, death, or other unavoidable cause.
When death occurs in a family, all the other families of the townland
cease working till the dead is buried—_gu’n cuirear uir fo uir_—till
earth is placed under earth.

‘Compassion for the poor, consideration towards the distressed, and
respect for the dead, are characteristic traits of these people. This is
inculcated in their sayings—

  ‘_Comhnadh ris_ a bhochd, cobhair ris a bhas, agus baigh ris a bhron,
  tri nithe ris nach do ghabh duine glic aithreachas riabh.

  ‘Succour to the poor, aid to the dead (in burying), and sympathy with
  the distressed, are three things which a wise man never regretted.

‘Their modes of dividing the land and of equalising their stock may seem
primitive and complex to modern views, but they are not so to the people
themselves, who apply these amicably, accurately, and skilfully. The
division of the land is made with care and justice. This is the interest
of all, no one knowing which place may fall to himself, for his
neighbour’s share this year may become his own three years hence.
Portioning the stock according to the grazing rights of individual
tenants, and equalising (_Coilpeachadh_) the stock so portioned, are
evidently the result of accurate observation.

‘Whatever be the imperfections, according to modern notions, of this
very old semi-family system of runrig husbandry, those tenants who have
least departed from it are the most comfortable in North Uist, and,
accordingly, in the Outer Hebrides.’

It will probably surprise many to find that a state of society such as
is above described should still exist in some of the townships of the
Outer Hebrides. It is not many years since similar communities were to
be found in the other islands and on the mainland. Their customs and
regulations are obviously pervaded by the spirit of the old tribal
communities, as exhibited in the Brehon Laws, and still possess, in more
or less degree, some of its characteristic features.

These farm communities, as they may be called, holding the arable land
in runrig, and the pasture land in common, are fast disappearing under
the influence of modern agricultural improvement, and it is well that
this record of the older system, with its characteristic features still
existing in some of the Highland townships, should be preserved ere it
passes away for ever.

-----

Footnote 313:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, pp. 66, 71.

Footnote 314:

  Robertson’s _Index_, p. 124, No. 25.

Footnote 315:

  _Chartulary of Moray_, p. 34.

Footnote 316:

  _The Thanes of Cawdor_, p. 3.

Footnote 317:

  _Ib_. p. 56.

Footnote 318:

  _Record of Returns for Elgin_, Nos. 25, 178.

Footnote 319:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 47.

Footnote 320:

  Shaw’s _Moray_, p. 227.

Footnote 321:

  _Chartulary of Moray_, pp. 83, 342.

Footnote 322:

  _Chartulary of Aberdeen_, vol. i. p. 55.

Footnote 323:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, vol. ii. p. 130, 132.

Footnote 324:

  _Ib_. p. 363.

Footnote 325:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, vol. ii. p. 216.

Footnote 326:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 21.

Footnote 327:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, 52, 183.

Footnote 328:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, vol. i. p. 286.

Footnote 329:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, i. pp. 11, 551.

Footnote 330:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, i. 250.

Footnote 331:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, 24. 19, 43, 117.

Footnote 332:

  _Ib_. 224. 14.

Footnote 333:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, i. 571.

Footnote 334:

  _Chartulary of Aberdeen_, vol. i. p. 360. These services consisted
  mainly of the obligation on the tenants to cut the proprietor’s corn.
  They continued to be exacted from the small tenants in many parts of
  the north-eastern Lowlands, under the name of Bonnach or Bonnage, till
  late in the eighteenth century. Each tenant had to give three days’
  labour annually, which were called his Bondage days.—_Stat. Acc._,
  1433, vi. 146.

Footnote 335:

  _Ib_. vol. i. pp. 12, 15.

Footnote 336:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. clxxxi. 442.

Footnote 337:

  _Rotuli Scotiæ_, vol. i. p. 10. _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 12.

Footnote 338:

  Robertson’s _Index_, pp. 17, 18.

Footnote 339:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 586.

Footnote 340:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 68, No. 229.

Footnote 341:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, vol. iii. p. 362.

Footnote 342:

  Robertson’s _Index_, p. 117, No. 72.

Footnote 343:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 585. In later allusions to Fettercairn
  and Kincardine in these Rolls they are always spoken of as convertible
  names for the same Thanage.

Footnote 344:

  Robertson’s _Index_.

Footnote 345:

  _Stat. Account_ (1791), vol. xvii. p. 387.

Footnote 346:

  _Misc. of Spalding Club_, vol. v. p. 209.

Footnote 347:

  Robertson’s _Index_, p. 32.

Footnote 348:

  See _ante_, vol. ii. p. 343.

Footnote 349:

  _Chartulary of St. Andrews_, pp. 229, 234, 238, 240.

Footnote 350:

  _Charters of Rostenoth._

Footnote 351:

  _Ant. Aberd. and Banff_, vol. iv. p. 711.

Footnote 352:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 588.

Footnote 353:

  _Retours for Forfar_, Nos. 377, 507.

Footnote 354:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 171; _Retours for Forfar_, 116.

Footnote 355:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, pp. 32, 72.

Footnote 356:

  _Retours for Forfar_, 536.

Footnote 357:

  Robertson’s _Index_, pp. 18, 23.

Footnote 358:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 44.

Footnote 359:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 43.

Footnote 360:

  _Chart. of Arbroath_, pp. 4, 67.

Footnote 361:

  _Ib_. pp. 163, 325. _Hist. MSS. Rep._ II. p. 166.

Footnote 362:

  _Chart. of Arbroath_, pp. 38, 39.

Footnote 363:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, i. p. 10.

Footnote 364:

  _Ib_. pp. 8, 50.

Footnote 365:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 124.

Footnote 366:

  _Chart. of Arbroath_, pp. 204, 330.

Footnote 367:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 589.

Footnote 368:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 88.

Footnote 369:

  _Retours for Forfar_, Nos. 424, 449.

Footnote 370:

  _Chart. of St. Andrews_, p. 128; _Retours, Fife_, 1370.

Footnote 371:

  _Chart. of May_, p. 2; Robertson’s _Index_, p. 25.

Footnote 372:

  _Chart. of St. Andrews_, p. 117; _Retours, Fife_, 131.

Footnote 373:

  On the shore of the Firth, near North Queensferry, was probably a
  thanage of Fordell, as in 1451 we find a grant to the monastery of
  Dunfermline by John, Thane de Fordell, and Alexander Thain, his son;
  but from the late date it is possible that this may have been a proper
  name.—_Chart. of Dunfermline_, p. 326.

Footnote 374:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 16; Robertson’s _Index_, 28; _Retours,
  Kinross_, 2.

Footnote 375:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, i. pp. 18, 534.

Footnote 376:

  _Chart. of Inchaffray_, p. 24; _Retours, Perth_, 305.

Footnote 377:

  _Chart. of Inchaffray_, s. 15, 16, 28.

Footnote 378:

  _Third Report of MS. Commission_, 406; _Retours, Perth_, 954.

Footnote 379:

  _Chart. of Inchaffray_, p. 20; _Retours, Perth_, 140, 471, 729.

Footnote 380:

  Crinan, the founder of the house, is termed in the Chronicles abbot of
  Dunkeld, and by Fordun Abthanus de Dull. There was no such title as
  abthanus, but the abthanrie of Dull appears in the Crown from the
  earliest period.

Footnote 381:

  _Liber de Scon_, p. 41.

Footnote 382:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 348.

Footnote 383:

  _Chartulary of St. Andrews_, pp. 245, 295.

Footnote 384:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, 74; Robertson’s _Index_, 57.

Footnote 385:

  These charters are, or were, in the Atholl charter-chest, but are not
  noticed by Mr. W. Fraser in his account of the Atholl charters in the
  _Seventh Report of the Hist. MSS. Commission_, p. 703.

Footnote 386:

  Mr. Innes, in his _Legal Antiquities_, p. 80, where a short notice of
  the thanage is given, inadvertently confounds the M‘Intoshes of Tiriny
  in Atholl with the M‘Intoshes of Monzievaird in Stratherne.

Footnote 387:

  _Liber de Scon_, pp. 21, 36.

Footnote 388:

  _Scotichronicon_, B. vi. c. 36. Donald Bane is improperly made by the
  peerage-writers father of Madach, first earl of Atholl, and progenitor
  of these earls; but there is no real authority for this; and the claim
  of Cumyn to the crown of Scotland, through his grand-daughter, shows
  that he left no male descendants, and that there were no subsequent
  earls of Gowry adds probability to the fact.

Footnote 389:

  _Liber de Scon_, pp. 6, 41, 45, 46, 95.

Footnote 390:

  _Chart. of Arbroath_, p. 27.

Footnote 391:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, pp. 137, 172.

Footnote 392:

  _Liber de Scon_, pp. 112, 113.

Footnote 393:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. pp. 3, 17, 18; _Reg. Mag. Sig._, p. 166.

Footnote 394:

  _Chartulary of Cambuskenneth_, pp. 250, 199; _Chart. of Glasgow_, p.
  9.

Footnote 395:

  _Chartulary of Cambuskenneth_, p. 108; _Chart. of Holyrood_, p. 51;
  Robertson’s _Index_, 38; _Chart. of Glasgow_, p. 120.

Footnote 396:

  _National MSS._, vol. i.

Footnote 397:

  Toscheoderach Barbarum nomen, priscis Scotis et Hybernis usitatum pro
  serjando vel serviente Curiæ, qui literas citationes mandat
  executioni. Quod officium dicitur vulgo, ane Mair of Fee.—_Reg. Maj._,
  p. 13.

Footnote 398:

  Train’s _History of the Isle of Man_, vol. ii. p. 209.

Footnote 399:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 58.

Footnote 400:

  _Ant. Ab. and Banff_, vol. iv. p. 453.

Footnote 401:

  _Retours, Elgin_, 25. Officium marisfeodi terrarum comitatus de
  Murray, viz., Thanagie de Murray.

Footnote 402:

  _Ant. of Ab. and Banff_, vol. iv. p. 476.

Footnote 403:

  _Chartulary of Aberdeen_, pp. 4, 6, 88, 428. _Ant. of Ab. and Banff_,
  vol. iii. p. 428.

Footnote 404:

  _Reg. Nigrum de Aberbrothoc_, p. 128.

Footnote 405:

  _Retours for Kincardine_, No. 19.

Footnote 406:

  The peerage-writers make Madach, earl of Atholl, son of Donald Bane,
  which, as we have stated, is disproved by the claim of the Cumyns,
  through female descent from him, to the throne. The _Orkneyinga Saga_
  names him Melcolm or Melmare.

Footnote 407:

  The line of these earls is very incorrectly given by the
  peerage-writers. They give the two sisters an elder anonymous sister,
  whom they marry to Alan Durward, who is mentioned in the _Chartulary
  of Arbroath_ (p. 76) as earl of Atholl in 1235; but as Thomas of
  Galloway died in 1231, leaving Isabella a widow, and her son succeeded
  in 1242, it is obvious that Alan held the earldom either as husband of
  the widow or guardian of the son. Then by misdating a charter by which
  John de Strathbolgie, earl of Atholl, and Ada, countess of Atholl,
  confirm the donation of the lands of Invervach made to the monks of
  Cupar by David de Hastings, earl of Atholl, father of Ada, in 1283 in
  place of 1254, which is the date given by Sir James Balfour, by whom
  alone a note of this charter has been preserved, they confound David
  de Strathbolgie, earl of Atholl, who died in a pilgrimage to the Holy
  Land in 1269, with his grandfather, David de Hastings, earl of Atholl,
  and his son John, earl of Atholl, with his grandfather, John earl of
  Atholl, the husband of Ada.

Footnote 408:

  See Riddell’s _Remarks on Scotch Peerage Law_, p. 149, for an account
  of this dispute.

Footnote 409:

  _The War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill_, pp. 171, 211.

Footnote 410:

  ‘Benedict XII. Dispen. Joanni quondam Engussii de Isle Sodoren. et
  Amiæ quondam Roderici de Insulis ... 1337.’

Footnote 411:

  _Scotichronicon_, vol. ii. p. 489.

Footnote 412:

  Et domino Comiti Rossiæ, Lachlano M‘Gillane, Torkell M‘Nell, Tarlano
  M‘Archir et Duncano Persoun de mandato domini regis ut patet per
  literas suas subsigneto ostensas super computum sub periculo
  computancium. Et eidem comiti pro panno laneo, pro capucio tunica
  caligis et pellibus rubeis pro juppone liiij lb iiij s. 14th July
  1438.—_Exchequer Rolls_, vol. v. p. 33.

Footnote 413:

  In the Appendix will be found a translation of part of the Red Book of
  Clanranald, containing the traditionary history of the Lords of the
  Isles; and Mr. Gregory’s History of the West Highlands and Isles of
  Scotland may be referred to for the above sketches.

Footnote 414:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig._, lib. xxx. No. 552.

Footnote 415:

  _Reg. Sec. Sig._, vol. xiii. fol. 17.

Footnote 416:

  _Ib._ vol. xvi. p. 1.

Footnote 417:

  MacNeill Charters.

Footnote 418:

  Argyll Charters.

Footnote 419:

  Protocol Book of Gavin Hamilton.

Footnote 420:

  Poltalloch Charters.

Footnote 421:

  Letterfinlay Charters, _Orig. Par._, vol. ii. p. 61.

Footnote 422:

  _Acts of Parliament_, v. 114.

Footnote 423:

  _Chart. of Lennox_, p. 49. Totum officium quod dicitur Tosheagor de
  Levenax.

Footnote 424:

  _Record of Retours_, Kirkcudbright, No. 30. Robertson’s _Index_, 146.
  25.

Footnote 425:

  Fordun’s _Chronicle_, Book v.

Footnote 426:

  _Scotichronicon_, ii. p. 252.

Footnote 427:

  Wyntoun, vol. ii. p. 141 (ed. 1872).

Footnote 428:

  Skene, _De Verborum Significatione_, _voce_ Clan Macduff.

Footnote 429:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 551.

Footnote 430:

  _Ib_. p. 746.

Footnote 431:

  _Historical Documents of Scotland_, edited by J. Stevenson, vol. i. p.
  415.

Footnote 432:

  _Chart. of Moray_, p. 12.

Footnote 433:

  Fordun, _Chronicle_, vol. ii. p. 38.

Footnote 434:

  _Scotichronicon_, vol. ii. p. 420.

Footnote 435:

  Wyntoun’s _Chronicle_, vol. iii. p. 58.

Footnote 436:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 579.

Footnote 437:

  Wyntoun’s _Chronicle_, ed. 1879, vol. iii. p. 63.

Footnote 438:

  _Scotichronicon_, vol. ii. p. 420.

Footnote 439:

  See Skene, _De Verborum Sig_., voce _Duellum_.

Footnote 440:

  _Book of Pluscarden_, vol. i. p. 330.

Footnote 441:

  _Chart. of Moray_, p. 382.

Footnote 442:

  MacIntosh Charters.

Footnote 443:

  _Reg. Mag. Sig_., lib. xiii. No. 96.

Footnote 444:

  Hector Boece terms them the Clan Quhete, substituting simply _t_ for
  _l_. His translators Bellenden, Leslie, and Buchanan, all have Clan
  Chattan.

Footnote 445:

  Just as Saint Caimhghin of Glendalough became Saint Kevin, so
  Caimhghilla became Kevil. Bower uses _k_ for _c_ and _quh_ for _ch_.

Footnote 446:

  _Miscellany of the Spalding Club_, vol. iv. p. 26.

Footnote 447:

  _Hist. of Moray_, p. 67. This Shaw was believed to be the first of the
  Shaws of Rothiemurchus, but the earlier part of the pedigree of this
  family is quite fictitious, for he is made to be the son of Gilchrist,
  son of John, who was in fact his opponent. He is said by Shaw to have
  died in 1405, but the traditionary dates connected with the Clan
  Chattan history are quite unreliable.

Footnote 448:

  These genealogies are printed in the Appendix.

Footnote 449:

  Tribus hæ sunt consanguinei parum in dominiis habentes, sed unum caput
  progeniei tanquam principem sequentes cum suis affinibus et
  subditis.—J. Major, _Scot. Hist._, lib. vi. f. 132.

Footnote 450:

  _Black Book of Taymouth_, pp. 185, 200. Many others of the same
  description will be found in this book.

Footnote 451:

  _Collectanea de Rebus Albanicis_, p. 206.

Footnote 452:

  _Black Book of Taymouth_, p. 179.

Footnote 453:

  _Black Book of Taymouth_, p. 223.

Footnote 454:

  _National MSS. of Scotland_, vol. ii. No. 84.

Footnote 455:

  _Collectanea de Rebus Albanicis_, p. 20.

Footnote 456:

  _Letters from a gentleman in the North of Scotland in 1726_, vol. ii.
  p. 1. A few unnecessary expressions have been omitted.

Footnote 457:

  The history of the clans from the forfeiture of the Lords of the Isles
  in 1492 to the year 1625 is given with great accuracy and detail in
  Mr. Gregory’s _History of the West Highlands and Isles of Scotland_.

Footnote 458:

  In 1566 the Privy Council issued a proclamation ‘that none presume
  to molest the Highlanders resorting to markets in the
  Lowlands.’—_Collectanea de Rebus Albanicis_, p. 151.

Footnote 459:

  Article on the Culloden Papers in the _Quarterly Review_ for January
  1826, written by Sir Walter Scott.

Footnote 460:

  _Acts of Parl._, vol. iii. p. 462.

Footnote 461:

  Thus it was only after the temporary break-up of the Clan Chattan and
  Clan Cameron in 1429 that we find captains of these clans appearing;
  and when Hector MacIntosh, bastard son of Ferquhard MacIntosh, who
  died in 1574, led the clan for a time, he is termed in 1529 Captain of
  Clan Chattan. The first Captain of Clanranald was Ian Mudortach, the
  bastard son of a second son; and the only time that this title appears
  in connection with the Clan Hustain, or Macdonalds of Sleat, is when
  it was led by an uncle of the chief, then in minority, who appears as
  Captain of the Clan Hustain.

Footnote 462:

  As in the Clan Chattan, where the Clan Vuireach, or old Clan Chattan,
  seldom recognised the authority of the captain; and in the Clanranald,
  where the MacDonells of Glengarry held aloof.

Footnote 463:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. iv. p. 71.

Footnote 464:

  _Collectanea de Rebus Albanicis_, p. 27.

Footnote 465:

  This syllable _Gal_ must not be confounded, as is often done, with
  _Gall_, a stranger; whence the names _Fingall_ and _Dubhgall_, white
  and black foreigners, were applied to the Norwegians and Danes.

Footnote 466:

  _Collectanea de Rebus Albanicis_, pp. 26, 27.

Footnote 467:

  The genealogy of the Clan Dubhgal in the Book of Ballimote has the
  mistake of making Dubhgal the son of Ragnall son of Somairle, in place
  of making him, as he was, son of Somairle and brother of Ragnall; and
  the same mistake occurs in the MS. of 1467.

Footnote 468:

  The genealogies contained in these MSS. will be found thus grouped in
  the Appendix, No. VIII.

Footnote 469:

  President Forbes, in his Memorial states that the Campbells were in
  Gaelic, Clan Guin or O’Duine.

Footnote 470:

  Charter ‘Duncanus filius Ferchar et Laumannus filius Malcolmi nepos
  ejusdem Duncani’ to the monastery of Paisley, of the lands of Kilmor
  inter 1230 et 1246.—_Chartulary of Paisley_, p. 132; confirmed by
  Angus, son of Duncan, in 1270.

Footnote 471:

  _Chart. of St. Andrews_, p. 117.

Footnote 472:

  _Chart. of Moray_, p. 87.

Footnote 473:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. iv. p. 138.

Footnote 474:

  Manuscript Hist. of the Grants.

Footnote 475:

  Buchanan of Auchmar’s Inquiry.

Footnote 476:

  MS. Hist. of M‘Kenzies.

Footnote 477:

  MS. Hist. of M‘Intoshes.

Footnote 478:

  MS. Histories of the family. See also Campbell’s _West Highland
  Tales_, vol. iii. p. 87. Mr. Campbell, however, erroneously translates
  the name of Duimhn as Brown. The word has no connection whatever with
  the Gaelic Donn, which signifies brown.

Footnote 479:

  _Chartulary of Melrose_, vol. i. p. 172.

Footnote 480:

  The first account has been printed by Mr. W. Fraser in his _Earls of
  Cromartie_, vol. ii. p. 462. The second account was printed some years
  ago.

Footnote 481:

  Peregrinus et Hybernus nobilis ex familia Geraldinorum, qui proximo
  anno ab Hybernia pulsus apud Regem benigne acceptus, huiusque in curia
  permansit, et in præfato prælio strenue pugnavit. De quo supra in
  prælio ad Largos, qui postea se fortiter contra Insulanos gessit, et
  ibi inter eos in præsidium relictus.

Footnote 482:

  Alexander Dei gracia rex Scottorum omnibus probis hominibus tocius
  terre sue clericis et laicis salutem. Sciant presentis et futuri me
  pro fideli servicio michi navato per Colinum Hybernum, tam in bello
  quam in pace, ideo dedisse et hac presenti carta mea concessisse dicto
  Colino et ejus successoribus, totas terras de Kintaile; Tenendas de
  nobis et successoribus nostris in liberam baroniam cum guardia:
  Reddendo servicium forinsecum et fidelitatem. Testibus Andrea episcopo
  Moraviensi, Waltero Stewart, Henrico de Balioth, camerario, Arnoldo de
  Campania, Thoma Hostiario, vicecomite de Invernes. Apud Kincardine,
  ix. die Januarii anno regni domini regis xvi.

Footnote 483:

  Robertson’s _Index_, p. 100.

Footnote 484:

  Two other charters, said to be granted by David II. in 1360 and Robert
  III. in 1380, are equally suspicious.

Footnote 485:

  Notwithstanding of this, it has found a defender in Mr. W. Fraser,
  who, in his _Earls of Cromartie_, not only maintains the genuineness
  of both documents, but declares the Irish MS. of 1467, containing the
  earlier genealogy, to be ‘quite fabulous.’ As Mr. Fraser never saw the
  MS. in question, and probably does not include among his requirements
  a knowledge of Irish MSS., his opinion is not entitled to much weight.
  The MS. does not, however, stand alone.

Footnote 486:

  In 1638 a history of the two Geraldine families—viz., the Earls of
  Desmond and Kildare—was compiled by a Dr. Russell, which may have
  attracted the Earl to this family, but there is no trace in it of
  Colin Fitzgerald.

Footnote 487:

  _Earls of Cromartie_, vol. ii. p. 509.

Footnote 488:

  Douglas’s _Baronage_, p. 375. _Chronicle of Man_, ed. Munch, pp. 19,
  25. An inscription upon an Irish meather or wooden drinking-cup
  preserved at Dunvegan has been supposed to indicate this descent from
  the kings of Mann. The inscription, says Sir Walter Scott, in the
  notes to the _Lord of the Isles_, p. 312, may run thus at length:—‘Ufo
  Johannis Mich Magni principis de Hr Manæ Vich Liahia Magryneil et
  sperat Domino Ihesu dari clementiam illorum opera. Fecit Anno Domini
  993, Onili Oim;’ which may run in English, ‘Ufo, the son of John the
  son of Magnus, Prince of Man, the grandson of Liahia Macgryneil,
  trusts in the Lord Jesus that their works will obtain mercy. Oneil
  Oimi made this in the year of God nine hundred and ninety-three.’

  The true reading is as follows:—‘Katharina Nigryneill uxor Johannis
  Meguigir principis de Fermanac me fieri fecit Anno Domini 1493. Oculi
  omnium in te sperant Domine et tu das escam illorum in tempore
  opportuno.’ That is, ‘Katharine MacRannal, wife of John Macguire, Lord
  of Fermanagh, caused me to be made in the year of our Lord 1493. The
  eyes of all hope in Thee, O Lord, and Thou givest them food in due
  season.’

Footnote 489:

  See Genealogy of M‘Leans in Appendix, No. VIII.

Footnote 490:

  _Collectanea de Rebus Albanicis_, p. 291.

Footnote 491:

  _Chart. of Aberdeen_, vol. i. pp. 12, 15; _Chart. of Moray_, p. 21.

Footnote 492:

  _Chart. of Aberdeen_, vol. i. p. 136.

Footnote 493:

  _Chart. of Moray_, p. 419; _Spalding Miscellany_, ii. 252.

Footnote 494:

  The district of Glenchatt in Birse, and the burn of Chattie, may have
  some connection with the name of Clanchattan.

Footnote 495:

  _Exchequer Rolls_, vol. i. p. 24.

Footnote 496:

  In a History of the Drummonds, compiled in 1861, the first Alwyn,
  there called Malise, is made a son of Ferchad, Earl of Stratherne, and
  marries Ada, daughter of David, earl of Huntingdon.

  This spurious descent of the earls of Lennox from the Northumbrian
  Archill was questioned by Lord Hailes, and rightly rejected by Mr.
  Robertson in his _Scotland under her Early Kings_, and by Mr. Cosmo
  Innes, but has again been revived by Mr. W. Fraser in his book of _The
  Lennox_, who is unable to produce any further authority for it than
  that it must have been received from the Laird of Macfarlane, because
  it appears in Douglas’s _Peerage_, to which that distinguished
  antiquary contributed some of the materials, and that the old earls of
  Lennox are called by the Gaelic bards ‘Siol Arkyll,’ that is,
  descendants of Arkill, but in both instances he is mistaken, for
  Douglas took his statement from Crawford, and it is not true that the
  old earls were ever called by the Gaelic bards ‘Siol Arkyll,’ and Mr.
  Fraser gives no authority for the statement.

Footnote 497:

  Item si calumpniatus vocaverit warentum aliquem in Ergadia que
  pertinet ad Scociam tunc veniat at Comitem Atholie vel ad Abbatem de
  Glendochard et ipsi mittent cum eo homines suos qui testentur super
  dictam attestam.—_Acts of Parliament_, vol. i. p. 372.

Footnote 498:

  The Dean makes Gregor son of John son of Malcolm son of Duncan Beg son
  of Duncan a Sruthlee (that is, of Stirling) son of Gillafaelan son of
  Aodh Urchaidh son of Kenneth son of Alpin.—_Dean of Lismore’s Book_,
  p. 161; and Gaelic portion, p. 127. See also poems, p. 141.

Footnote 499:

  Douglas’s _Baronage_, pp. 497, 498.

Footnote 500:

  In the main the author has seen little reason to alter the
  distribution of the clans in an earlier work, _The Highlanders of
  Scotland_, published in 1837, to which the reader is referred for
  their detailed history.

Footnote 501:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. iv. p. 548.

Footnote 502:

  _Ib_. p. 547.

Footnote 503:

  This account is taken mainly from Marshall’s _Agriculture of the
  Central Highlands_, and from private information.

Footnote 504:

  This is very similar to the custom in the Bavarian and Austrian Alps,
  where the summer pasture is termed an Alp and the bothies
  _Sennerhütte_.

Footnote 505:

  _Acts of Parliament_, vol. vii. p. 438.

Footnote 506:

  _Ib_. vol. ix. p. 421.

Footnote 507:

  The old servile condition of the small tenants, by which they were
  attached to the soil, and could not be severed from it, which is
  usually regarded as an oppressive custom, would probably have been
  valued at this time as a privilege.

Footnote 508:

  The preceding sketch has been mainly taken from the reports of the
  Board for the Relief of Highland Destitution in the years 1847-1850
  (Third Report for 1848, p. 24; Second Report for 1850, p. 40). The
  author filled the office of Secretary to the Board, which necessarily
  brought the state of the population under his notice, and these
  reports were compiled by himself.

Footnote 509:

  Bo le h-al, cow and her progeny. A cow is said to be entitled to her
  calf for a year and a day.

Footnote 510:

  A name applied in the Highlands to one-year-old sheep.

Footnote 511:

  The constable of the townland is sometimes termed _am Maor beg_, the
  little or sub-Maor. Maor is a frequent name of an office-holder, as
  _Maor gruinnd_, ground-officer; _Maor fearainn_, land-steward; _Maor
  ceilp_, kelp-officer; _Maor cladaich_, shore-officer; _Maor coille_,
  forester.




                               APPENDIX.

                                   I.

    TRANSLATION of a part of the BOOK OF CLANRANALD, containing the
Legendary History of the Lords of the Isles, as given by the Macvurichs,
                   hereditary Sennachies of the Clan.


The children of Eochaidh Duibhlein, son of Cairbre Lithfeachar, son of
Cormac, were three sons, who were called the three Collas,—Colla Uais,
Colla Da crioch, and Colla Meann; their baptismal names were Caireall,
Aodh, and Muireadhach, as says the poet—

               Caireall, the first name of Colla Uais;
               Aodh, of Colla Meann of great vigour;
               Muireadhach, of Colla Da chrioch;
               They were imposed on them after rebelling.

Colla Uais, son of Eochaidh Duibhlein, assumed the sovereignty of Erinn
in the year of the age of Christ 322; and he was four years in the
sovereignty of Erinn when Muireadhach Tireach opposed him with a
powerful army, and gave battle to the three Collas, and expelled them to
Alban, where they obtained extensive lands, for Oileach, daughter of the
king of Alban, was their mother. In the time when Cormac Finn was in the
sovereignty over Alban, 362 (326), they spent some time in Alban, until
a war broke out between Muireadhach Tireach, king of Erinn and the
Ulltaibh, viz., the Clanna Rughruidhe; and he invited the sons of his
father’s brother, that is, the three Collas, to Erinn to assist him
against the Clanna Rughruidhe and the adjoining districts. They
responded to the king of Erinn, and waged a fierce war against the
Clanna Rughruidhe; and Feargus Foga, king of Uladh, and his three sons,
fell by them; and they took possession of the province of Uladh, and of
the Oilltrian of the province of Connacht, and many other possessions
which were inherited by their race in succession from the kings of
Erinn.

As to Colla Uais, after he had terminated that war he returned back to
Alban, and left all those possessions to his brothers; and having spent
fifteen years there he went on a free visit to Erinn, and died at
Teamhair of the kings, Anno Domini 335.

Colla Uais had four good sons, namely, Eochuidh and Fiachra Tort, and
Fearadhach and Maine. All the Clann Domhnuill in Alban and in Erinn are
of the race of Eochuidh. The Turtruighe and Fir Luirg are of the race of
Fiachraidh Tort. The Fir Li and Fir Lacha are of the race of Fearadhach.
The race of Main is not known to us.

A goodly race, descended from Colla Da chrioch, flourished in Erinn,
namely Maguire, chief over the country of Fermanagh; Mac Mahon, chief
over the country of Monaghan; O’Hanlon, and O’Kelly, and many others.

I have seen nothing written of the race of Colla Meann, except such holy
men of them as went into the Church. Many of the holy people of Alban
and Erinn were descended from the three Collas.

Here is the direct line of descent from Colla Uais. Eochaidh was
begotten of Colla Uais; Carran was begotten of Eochaidh; Earc was
begotten of Carran; Maine was begotten of Earc; Fearghus was begotten of
Maine; Gothfruigh was begotten of Fearghus; Niallghus was begotten of
Gothfruigh. [The genealogy of Macdomhnuill of Clann cheallaigh:
Flannagan, son of Tadhg, son of Fearmara, son of Tadhg, son of Lochlann,
son of Art, son of Fianacht, son of Domhnall, from whom are the Clann
Domhnaill of Clann Ceallaidh, son of Colgan, son of Ceallach, son of
Tuathal, son of Maolduin, son of Tuadan, son of Tuathal, son of
Daimhinn, son of Cairbre, son of Dom Airgid, son of Niallghus.] Suibhne
was begotten of Niallghus; Mearghach was begotten of Suibhne; Solomh was
begotten of Mearghach; Giolla Oghamhnan was begotten of Solomh. It is
from this Giolla Oghamhnan descended the Clann Domhnaill of Ros Laogh,
from a brother of Giolla Bride, son of Giolla Oghamhnan; and it was
Giolla Oghamhnan that erected Mainistir-na-Sgrine, in Tir Iarach, in the
county of Sligo, in the province of Connacht, and his name is there.
(And be it known to you that the constant title borne by the clann of
this tribe, from Ragnall, son of Somairli, up to Colla Uais, was O’Colla
and Toisech of Eargaoidheal.) Giolla Bride, son of Gille Oghamhnan, son
of, and from him, the Toisechs of Earargaoidheal (Argyll), having been
among his kindred in Erinn, that is, from the Clann Colla, which are the
Manchuidh and Mathdamnaidh, viz., the tribes of Macguire and Macmahon,
it happened that this tribe held a meeting and conference in Fermanagh,
on the estate of Macguire, and among the matters to be transacted was
that Giollabride should get some estate of his own country, since he had
been in banishment from his inheritance, by the power of the Lochlannach
and Fionngallach (Norwegians). When Giollabride saw a large host of
young robust people in the assembly, and that they were favourable to
himself, the favour he asked of his friends was, that so many persons as
the adjacent fort in the place could hold should be allowed to go to
Alban with him, in the hope that he might obtain possession of his own
inheritance and portion of it.

Giolla Bride proceeded with that party to Alban, where they landed. They
made frequent onsets and attacks on their enemies during this time of
trouble, for their enemies were powerful and numerous at that time. All
the islands from Manann (Mann) to Arca (Orkneys), and all the Oirir
(border land) from Dun Breatan (Dumbarton) to Cata (Caithness) in the
north, were in the possession of the Lochlannach; and such of the
Gaedhal of those lands as remained were protecting themselves in the
woods and mountains; and at the end of that time Giolla Bride had a good
son, who had come to maturity and renown.

It happened that the small party who were followers of Giolla Bride and
Somairli (Somerled) were in the mountains and woods of Ardgobbar
(Ardgour) and of the Morbhairne (Morvern), and they were surprised there
by a large force of Lochlannach and Fionnghallach. All the soldiers and
plundering parties which Somerled had, gathered round him, and he
arranged them front and rear. Somerled put them in battle order, and
made a great display of them to his enemies. He marched them three times
before them in one company, so that they supposed there were three
companies there. After that he attacked them, and they were defeated by
Somerled and his party, and he did not halt in the pursuit till he drove
them northward across the river Sheil, and a part escaped with their
king to the Isles; and he did not cease from that work till he cleared
the western side of Alban of the Lochlannach, except the Islands of the
Fionnlochlann (Norwegians), called Innsigall; and he gained victory over
his enemies in every field of battle. He spent part of his time in war
and part in peace, until he marched with an army to the vicinity of
Glaschu (Glasgow), when he was slain by his page, who took his head to
the king, in the year of our Lord 1180 (1164). His own people assert
that it was not to make war against the king that he went on that
expedition, but to obtain peace, for he did more in subduing the king’s
enemies than any war he waged against him.

Somerled had a good family, viz., Dubhghal and Raghnall, and the Gall
mac Sgillin, this man being so named from whom are descended the Clann
Gall in the Glens. Bethog, daughter of Somerled, was a religious woman
and a Black Nun. It is she that erected Teampall Chairinis, or the
Church of Cairinis, in Uibhist (Uist). Dubhgal, son of Somerled, took
the chiefship of Eargaoidheal and Ladharna (Argyll and Lorn). Raghnall
and his race went to Innsigall and Ceanntire, where his posterity
succeeded him.

Ragnall, king of Innsigall, and Oirirgaoidheal (the Isles and Argyll),
was the most distinguished of the Gall or Gaoidheal for prosperity, sway
of generosity, and feats of arms. Three monasteries were erected by him,
viz., a monastery of Black Monks (Benedictines) in I (Iona), in honour
of God and Columcille; a monastery of Black Nuns in the same place, and
a monastery of Grey Friars at Saghadul (Saddle in Kintyre), and it is he
also who founded the monastic order of Molaise.

Be it known to you that Ragnall with his force was the greatest power
which King Alexander had against the King of Lochlann at the time he
took the Islands from the Lochlannach, and after having received a cross
from Jerusalem, partaken of the Body of Christ, and received unction, he
died, and was buried at Reilic Oghran in I (Iona) in the year of our
Lord 1207. And it was some time after this that Ragnall, son of
Gofraidh, king of the Fionngall (Norwegians), was treacherously killed
by Amhlamh, son of Gofraidh, in the year of our Lord 1229. From this
forth the rightful inheritance of Innsigall came to Ragnall, and his
race after him, for the daughter of Amhlamh Dearg, son of Gofraidh, was
the mother of Ragnall, son of Somerled. This daughter of Amhlamh was the
lawful heir of her father and of her two brothers, viz. Ragnall and
Amhlamh Dubh.

Messages came from Teamhair (Tara in Ireland) that Domhnall, son of
Ragnall, should take the government of Innsigall and of the greater part
of the Gaoidheal. He had good children, viz. Aonghus Mor, the heir, and
Alasdair, from whom descended the Clann Domhnaill Renna, Mac William of
the province of Connaught, and the Clann t-Sidhigh (Sheehy) of Munster,
who are sprung from Siothach an Dornan, son of Eachuin, son of Alasdair.

Aonghus Mor, son of Domhnall, son of Ragnall, took the place of his
father, and it was in his time that the war of the Baliols and the
Bruces broke out. The tribe of Dubhgal, son of Somerled, took the side
of the Baliols, and the race of Ragnal, son of Somerled, the side of
Robert Bruce, and all the garrisons from Inbhear Feothfar (Dingwall) in
the Ross to the Mull of Kintyre were in the possession of MacDubhgal
during that time, while the tribe of Ragnall were under the yoke of
their enemies.

Aonghus Mor had good children, viz. Aonghus Og, the heir, and Eoin, from
whom sprang the Clann Eoin of Ardnamurchan, and Alasdair, from whom
descended the Clann Alasdair; and Aonghus na Conluighe, from whom are
sprung the Clann Donchaidh and Robertsons; and much may be written about
this Aonghus Mor which is not here. He died in Ile (Isla) in the year of
our Lord 1234 (1294).

Aonghus Og, son of Aonghus Mor, son of Domhnall, son of Ragnall, son of
Somerled, the noble and renowned high chief of Innsigall. He married the
daughter of Cuinnbhuighe O’Cathan. She was the mother of Eoin, son of
Aonghus, and it is with her came the unusual retinue from Erinn, viz.
four-and-twenty sons of clan families, from whom sprang four-and-twenty
families in Alban. Aonghus had another son, viz. Eoin Og an Fhraoich,
from whom descended the Clann Eoin of Glencomhan (Glencoe), who are
called the Clann Domhnall an Fhraoich (of the heather). This Aonghus Og
died in Ile (Isla), and his body was interred in I (Iona) in the year of
our Lord 1306 (1326).

Eoin, son of Aonghus Og, succeeded his father in the chief government of
Innsigall. He had good children, viz. three sons by Anna, daughter of
Ruadhri, son of Ailin, high chief of Lagarna (Lorn), and one daughter
Mairi, and that Mairi was the wedded wife of Eachduinn MacGiolla Eoin
(Hector MacLean), Lord of Dubhard (Duart), and Lochlan was his brother,
and she was interred with the Lord of Coll in I (Iona), in the church of
the Black Nuns.

The eldest sons of Eoin were Ragnall, Gothfruigh and Aonghus; however he
did not marry the mother of these men from the altar, but came to the
resolution of marrying her at the time of her death, for she was a
sufficient wife for him; but his advisers opposed him regarding it, for
it appeared to them that he could get a suitable match if an heir was
made from his first progeny, although he was young and vigorous.
Therefore he made a provision for his son Ragnall, and that was all the
land which extended from Cillchuimin in Obuirthairbh (Abertarff) to the
river Sheil, and from the river Sheil to the Belleith in the north, Eig
and Rum, and the two Uibhists (North and South Uist). And after that he
proceeded to the mouth of the river of Glascu, and had threescore
long-ships with him, and he married Margaret, the daughter of Robert
Stuart, whom we call King of Alban, but the real person was Robert, Earl
of Fife, that is the brother-german of old Robert Fearingiora, that is
the king, and he was governor of Alban. And she bore to Eoin three good
sons, viz. Domhnall of Ile, the heir, and Eoin Mor the Tanist, and
Alasdair Carrach, the third son. Eoin had another son, viz. Marcos, from
whom descended the Clann Domhnall of Cnoic-an-chluith in Tir Eoghain
(Tirone in Ireland). This Eoin enjoyed a long life. It is he that made
donations to Icolumcille in his own time, and it is he also that covered
the chapel of Elan Eorsag and the chapel of Elan Finlagan, and the
chapel of Elan Suibhne (island in Loch Sween), with all their
appropriate instruments for order and mass and the service of God, for
the better upholding of the monks and priests this lord kept in his
company; and it is he that erected the monastery of the Holy Cross a
long time before his death; and he died in his own castle of Ardtorinis,
while monks and priests were over his body, he having received the body
of Christ and having been anointed, his fair body was brought to
Icolumcille, and the abbot and the monks and vicars came to meet him, as
it was the custom to meet the body of the king of Fionnghall, and his
service and waking were honourably performed during eight days and eight
nights, and he was laid in the same grave with his father in Teampal
Oghrain in the year of our Lord 1380.

Ragnall, the son of Eoin, was High Steward over Innsigall at the time of
his father’s death, being in advanced age and ruling over them. On the
death of his father he called a meeting of the nobles of Innsigall and
of his brethren at one place, and he gave the sceptre to his brother at
Cill Donan in Egg, and he was nominated MacDonald and Domhnall of Ile
(Isla) contrary to the opinion of the men of Innsigall. A man of
augmenting churches and monasteries was this Ragnall, son of Eoin, son
of Aonghus Og, from whom the name of Clann Raghnall has been applied to
his race. He bestowed a Tirunga (unciata) of land in Uibhisd (Uist) on
the monastery of I (Iona) for ever, in honour of God and of Columcille.
He was governor of the whole of the Northern Oirir (Coastland) and of
the Isles, until he died in the year of the age of Christ 1386, in his
own manor of Caislen Tirim, having left a family of five sons.

We shall now treat of Domhnall a hile (Donald of Isla), son of Eoin, son
of Aonghus Oig, the brother of Ragnall, how he took the lordship with
the consent of his brethren and the nobles of Innsigall, all other
persons being obedient to him, and he married Mairi, daughter of the
Earl of Ros, and it is through her that the earldom of Ros came to the
Clan Domhnall. He was styled Earl of Ros and MacDomhnall, and High Chief
of Innsigall. There are many exploits and deeds written of him in other
places. He fought the battle of Gairfech (Garrioch or Harlaw) against
Duke Murdoch in defence of his own right and of the earldom of Ros, and
on the return of King James the First from the captivity of the King of
Sagsan (England), Domhnall of Ile obtained the king’s goodwill and
confirmation of Ros and the rest of his inheritance, and Duke Murdoch
and his two sons were beheaded.

He (Domhnuill) was an entertainer of clerics and priests and monks in
his companionship, and he gave lands in Mull and in Isla to the
monastery of I, and every immunity which the monastery of I had from his
ancestors before him; and he made a covering of gold and silver for the
relic of the hand of Coluimcille, and he himself took the brotherhood of
the order, having left a lawful and suitable heir in the government of
Innsigall and of Ros, viz. Alasdair son of Domhnaill. He afterwards died
in Isla, and his full noble body was interred on the south side of
Tempall Oghran.

Alasdair, his son, succeeded his father in the earldom of Ros and
lordship of Innsigall. He married Margaret Livingston, daughter of the
Earl of Lithcu; she was mother of Eoin, who was called Eoin of Ile or
Isla, son of Alasdair of Ile, son of Domhnall of Ile.

Aonghus Og, son of Eoin, who was called the heir of Eoin, married the
daughter of Mac Cailin (Earl of Argyll), and a disagreement arose
between him and his father about the division of his territory and land,
in consequence of which a war broke out between the chiefs of Innsigall
and the tribe of MacDomhnaill, the tribe having joined Aonghus, and the
chiefs having joined Eoin. And the affair having been thus carried on,
Eoin went to Mac Cailin and gave him all that lay between Abhuinn Fhada
(the river Add) and Altna Sionnach at Braigh Chinntire (that is, the
lands of Knapdale), for going with him before the king to complain of
his son. Shortly afterwards this Aonghus Og had a large entertainment
with the men of the north side at Inbhearnis, when he was murdered by
Mac ICairbre, his own harper, who cut his throat with a long knife.

His father lived a year after him, and all the territories submitted to
him, but, however, he restored many of them to the king.

The daughter of Mac Cailin, the wife of Aonghus, was pregnant at the
time he was killed; and she was kept in custody until she was confined,
and she bore a son, and Domhnall was given as a name to him, and he was
kept in custody until he arrived at the age of thirty years, when the
men of Gleann Comhan (Glencoe) brought him out by a Fenian exploit. On
his coming out of custody he came to Innsigall, and the nobles of
Innsigall rallied round him.

During the time that Domhnall Dubh had been in custody there was a great
struggle among the Gaoidheal for power, so that Mac Ceaain of
Ardnamurchan almost destroyed the race of Eoin Mor, son of Eoin of Ile
and of Ceanntire. Eoin Cathanach, son of Eoin, son of Domnall Balloch,
son of Eoin Mor, son of Eoin, son of Aongus Og, Lord of the race of Eoin
Mor, and Eoin Mor, son of Eoin Cathanach, and Eoin Og, son of Eoin
Cathanach, and Domhnall Balloch, son of Eoin Cathanach, were
treacherously taken prisoners by MacCeain on the island of Fionnlagan in
Ile; and he conveyed them to Duneidin, and a gallows was erected for
them at that place which is called Baramuir (Boroughmuir), and they were
executed, and their bodies buried in the church of Saint Francis, which
is called Teampal Nua (New church) at this time. There were none left of
the children of Eoin Cathanach but Alasdair, son of Eoin Cathanach, and
Aongus Ileach, who were hiding in the Glens in Erinn. And it is related
of MacCeaain that he expended much wealth of gold and silver in making
axes for the purpose of cutting down the woods of the Glens, in the hope
he might be able to banish Alasdair, son of Eoin Cathanach, out of the
Glens and out of the world. It happened at length that MacCeaain and
Alasdair made an agreement and a marriage-contract with each other.
Alasdair married his daughter, and she bore a good family to him.

In a similar manner a misfortune came over the Clann Domhnall of the
north side, for after the death of Eoin of Ile, Earl of Ros, and the
killing of Aongus, Alasdair, son of Giollaeaspuig, son of Alasdair of
Ile, took possession of the earldom of Ros and of the northern Oirir
entirely, and married the daughter of Morbhair Moireagh (Earl of Moray).
However, some of the men of the northern side came, when the Clann
Choinnidh (Mackenzies) and others rose up in opposition to Alasdair, and
fought the battle of Blar, which they call Blar na Pairce.

Alasdair had no men left but such as he had of the men of Ros. Alasdair
came to the coast after that to seek for a force in Innsigall, and he
embarked in a long-ship to the southern Oirir to see if he could find a
few remaining of the race of Eoin Mor. Mac Ceaain observed him, and
followed him on his track to Oransay of Colonsay, and entered the house
upon him, where Alasdair, son of Gilleaspuig, was killed by Mac Ceaain
and by Alasdair, son of Eoin Cathanach.

This matter remained so for a space of time, until Domhnall Gallda, son
of Alasdair, son of Gilleaspuig, came of age; and he came from the
Galltachd (the Lowlands) by the direction of Morbhar Moireagh (the Earl
of Moray), until he came to Innsigall; and he brought Macleod of Leoghas
with him, and a good number of the nobles of Innsigall. They went out on
Rudha-Ardnamurchan (the Point of Ardnamurchan), and there they met
Alasdair, son of Eoin Cathanach, and he and Domhnall, son of Alasdair,
made a compact and agreement with each other; and they together attacked
Mac Ceaain at a place called Creagan Airgid, and he and his three sons
and many of his people were slain there.

Domhnall Gallda was nominated Mac Domhnall of this side of Ruga
Ardnamurchan (the Point of Ardnamurchan), and the men of Innsigall
submitted to him; but he did not live after that but seven or eight
weeks. He died at Cearnaborg in Mull, leaving no family or heir; but
three sisters he had, viz. the three daughters of Alasdair, son of
Gilleaspuig. A settlement was made on those daughters in the northern
Oirir, but they gave up Ros. Alasdair, son of Gilleaspuig, had a natural
son, of whose descendants there is some account, viz. Eoin Cam, son of
Alasdair, from whom are sprung the men of Achuidh na Cothaichean in the
Braighe, and Domhnall Gorm, son of Raghnall, son of Alasdair Dubh, son
of Eoin Cam.

With regard to Domhnall Dubh, son of Aongus, son of Eoin of Ile, son of
Alasdair of Ile, son of Domhnall of Ile, son of Eoin of Ile, son of
Aongus Og, viz. the lineal lawful heir of Innsigall and of Ros, on his
release from confinement he came to Innsigall, and the men of Innsigall
gathered about him; and he and the Earl of Leamnachd (Lennox) made an
agreement to raise a large army for the purpose of his getting into
possession of his own property; and a ship came to them from England to
Caol Muile (Sound of Mull), with money to help them in the war. The
money was given to MacGilleoin of Dubhard (MacLean of Duart) to divide
among the leaders of the army; they did not get as much as they desired,
and therefore the army broke up. When the Earl of Leamhnachd heard that
he dispersed his own army, and made an agreement with the king.
Macdomhnaill then proceeded to Erinn to request a force to carry on the
war, and on his way to Baile Atha Cliath (Dublin) he died at
Droichead-Ath (Drogheda) of a fever of five nights, without leaving a
son or daughter as his offspring.

O’Henna made this on Eoin of Ile:—

          The sovereignty of the Gael to the Clann Colla,
              It is right to proclaim it;
          They were again in the same battalions,
              The heroes of Fodla (a name of Ireland).
          The sovereignty of Erinn and of Alban
              Of the sunny lands
          Was possessed by the sanguinary sharp-bladed tribes,
              The fighting champions.
          The government of the entire tribes was obtained
              By Eoin of Ile.
          Alasdair, the lord of hospitality, obtained
              The profit of kings.
          Domhnall, Eoin, and two Aonghus’,
              Who were hospitable and joyful,
          Four that gained tribute from kings,
              And to whom the Gael submitted.
          Domhnall and Raghnall to kings
              Never did give;
          Somairle, who was not deceived by flattery,
              The chief of heroes.
          Four from Somairle of the blue eyes
              Up to Suibhne;
          Four whose dignity was not obscure,
              It is right to remember them.
          Six from Suibhne before mentioned
              To king Colla;
          Wine they had on the banks of the Banna
              In angular cups.
          Were I to enumerate all those connected with him
              Of the nobles of the Gael,
          I might give every generation up to Adam,
              Such as no other man has attained.
          This is a sketch of the genealogies of the Gael,
              As I have promised;
          This tribe with whom no comparison should be made,
              And to whom sovereignty was due.

Age of our Lord 1473, the year that Giollaespuig, son of Alasdair of
Ile, died, and his body was interred at Rosmhaircni, viz. the brother of
Eoin of Ile, and the father of Alasdair, son of Giollaespuig, was killed
by Mac Ceaain in Orbhansaigh Colbhansaigh (Oransay of Colonsay); and the
daughter of Mac Duibhsithe of Lochaber was the mother of this
Giollaespuig, son of Alasdair of Ile.

Age of the Lord 1437. In this year the King of Alban, viz. King James
the First, was treacherously killed in the town of Pheart (Perth) by his
father’s brother, viz. Morbhair Athfall (Earl of Athole).

In the same year died Aonghus, bishop of Innsigall, son of Domhnall of
Ile, son of Eoin, son of Aonghus Og. His noble fair body was buried,
with his crozier and his episcopal habit, in the transept on the south
side of the great choir, which he selected for himself while alive.
Domhnall of Ile had another son, a monk, and it was in his time that
Baile-an-Mhanuidh in Uibhisd (Uist) was given to the church, anno Domini
1440.

In this year died Mairi Leisli Banmorbhair (Countess) of Ros, and Lady
of Innsigall, viz. the wife of Domhnall of Ile.

I have given you an account of everything you require to know of the
descendants of the Clanns of the Collas and Clann Domhnall to the death
of Domhnall Dubh at Drochead Atha, viz. the direct line who possessed
Innsigall, Ros, and the Garbhchriochan (rough bounds) of Alban. This
Domhnall was the son of Aonghus (that was killed at Inbhernis by his own
harper Mac IChairbre), son of Eoin of Ile, son of Alasdair, son of
Domhnall of Ile, son of Eoin of Ile, son of Aonghus Og, and I know not
which of his kindred or friends is his lawful heir. Except these five
sons of Eoin, son of Aonghus Og, whom I set down to you, viz. Raghnall
and Gothfraigh, the two sons of the daughter of Mac Dubhgaill of Lagairn
(Lorn), and Domhnall, and Eoin Mor, and Alasdair Carrach, the three sons
of Mairgred Sdiuord, daughter of the Earl of Fife, and governor of the
King of Alban.

The race of Raghnall, Lord of Clann Raghnaill, viz. the House of Oilen
Tirim, and the Lord of Gleann Garadh (Glengarry).

Gothfruith left no offspring, except a few poor people who are in North
Uibhisd.

The offspring of Domhnall of Ile, the eldest son of Mairgred Stiubhord,
was Alasdair of Ile, Earl of Ros and Morbhair of the Islands. This
Alasdair married Mairgred Livisdon, daughter of the Earl of Lithcu, to
whom she bore Eoin the Earl. Alasdair had other children, viz. Huisdinn,
by a daughter of Giolla Phadraig Riaigh, son of Ruaighri, son of the
Green Abbot, son of the Earl of Ros, whose surname was of the Rosses. He
had for patrimony the third part of Lewis, and other lands upon the
mainland. It is he that was killed in the parts of Gallolach (Garrioch)
when along with Mac Domhnall, viz. Domhnall of Ile. For there were four
that went out of the army before any part of the main force went with
them, viz. Tormord Macleoid and Torcuill his brother, Lochluinn mac
Gillemhaoil and Giolla Padraig mac Ruaighri. Giolla Padraig mac Ruaighri
and Lochluinn mac Giollamhaoil were killed, but Tormoid and Torcuill
escaped safe from the pursuit.

It was this Huisdinn, son of Alasdair, that plundered Orcain (Orkney),
and William Macleoid of Heradh (Harris), and the youth of Innsigall were
along with him in that expedition. Huisdinn caused Domhnall Gallach, son
of Huisdinn, to marry the daughter of Cruner Gall (the Coroner of
Caithness), and she was of the Gunns. Huisdinn had other good children,
viz. Domhnall Herach, son of Huisdinn, and the daughter of Macleoid of
Heradh was his mother; and Eoin, son of Huisdinn, and the daughter of
Mac Cean of Ardnamurchan was his mother; but that Eoin left no issue,
and Giollaespuig, son of Huisdinn, possessed the lordship, and other
sons who are not mentioned here. Domhnall Gruamach, son of Domhnall
Gallach, and Domhnall Gorm, son of Domhnall Gruamach, and Catriana,
daughter of Alasdair, son of Ailin, Lord of Clann Raghnaill, was his
mother, whose descendants still possess the lordship.

Giollaespuig, son of Alasdair of Ile, whose mother was daughter of Mac
Duibhsithe of Lochabar, and Alasdair, son of Giollaespuig, who obtained
possession of the earldom of Ros, and Domhnall, his son, died without
issue.

Eoin Mor, son of Eoin, son of Aonghus Og, the Tanist to Mac Domhnall,
married Mairi Bised, and it was with her the seven Tuaths of the Glens
came into the possession of the Clann Domhnall.

Alasdair Carrach, the third son, married the daughter of Morbbair
Leamhna (the Earl of Lennox), but she bore no children to him. Aonghus,
son of Alasdair, whose mother was a daughter of Mac Dubhshibhe, but she
was not married to him. Alasdair, son of Aonghus, from whom are
descended the race of Alasdair, son of Aonghus, in the Braes of
Lochabar.

There you have the descendants of these four sons of Eoin, son of
Aonghus Og.


                                  II.

                       BAILE SUTHAIN SITH EAMHNA.




An Irish poem relating to the Kingdom of the Isles, copied from a
fragment (paper) of an Irish MS. written _circa_ A.D. 1600, in the
possession of W. M. Hennessy, Esq., collated with a copy contained in
the Book of Fermoy (R. I. Academy), transcribed about A.D. 1457.

                                              II.
                                          TRANSLATION
                                    BY W. M. HENNESSY, Esq.


                 I.
    Baile suthain sioth Eamhna,
    Cruthaidh an chrioch a ttarla,
    Raith chaomh os cionn gach diongna
    ’Nab iomdha craobh fhionn abhla.

                                     I.
                        A perpetual place is Sith-Eamhna,
                        Beauteous the territory in which it is found
                        A fair Rath above every fort,
                        In which fair apple-trees are plenty.

                 II.
    Eamhoin abhlach as uire,
    Teamhoir na tteaghlach mbuaidhe,
    Tearc dun na cnoc as caoimhe,
    Na mbrot naoidhe (naeighi) n-ur n-uaine.

                                    II.
                        Eamhain of the apples, the freshest,
                        The Tara of the victorious households,
                        Few the duns and hills more fair,
                        In their young, fresh, green garments.

               III.
    Eamhuin raith aoibhin ionnfhuar (fhinnfhuar),
    Raith as faoilidh fa fhionndan,
    Geabhuidh rod go ro seandun,
    Bo bheannur og ar ioman.

                                  III.
                        Emhain, the delightful, cool Rath,
                        The Rath to which fair art is welcome;
                        The road to the old fort will
                        A young-horned cow a-driving take.

                IV.
    Iomhda an Eamhoin fhinn fhear uir
    D’fhearaibh ar a sil saor shuil,
    Marcach eich duinn go dioghair
    Tre dhreich siodhain ccuir (cuir) ccraobhuir (craebair).

                                    IV.
                        In bright Emhain of the fresh grass,
                        Many the men on whom a noble eye looks;
                        Many the vehement rider of a brown steed
                        Approaching in peace through the branchy woods.

                  V.
    Iomhda an (ind) Eamhoin (Emain) na n-innbhear (indmher),
    Ris nar dhealaigh a doinnfleadh,
    Guirt ar na nar a bhfagmar (an fhamur),
    Dharbhar ghlan chuirp an choimdeadh (choimghedh).

                                      V.
                        Many in Emhain of the estuaries
                        (From which their deep floods have not departed)
                        The fields tilled in harvest
                        With clear corn of the Lord’s body.

                  VI.
    Suairc bfhairche fhir an dumha (fir in duma),
    Atibh na tairthe meala,
    Dul go sidh (cu sid) bhlaith an (in) bhrogha.
    Dola go (cu) raith mhin meadha.

                                      VI.
                        Joyous the estate of the man of the _dumha_
                        Which has drunk the showers of honey;
                        To go to the sweet _sidh_ of the Brug
                        Is to go to the smooth Bath of mead.

                  VII.
    Eamhain (Em̄) abhlach na n-iobhar
    Sleamhain barrdhath a bileadh,
    Baile nua san (fan) dubh droighean,
    Nar hoilead lugh ua an fhilead.

                                      VII.
                        The appley Emhain of the yews,
                        Smooth, top-coloured are its trees;
                        A new place under the black thorn,
                        In which was nursed Lugh, descendant of the
                           poet.[512]

                  VIII.
    Eamhain (Em̄) na nabhall ccumhra (cumra),
    Teamhair (Temair) Mhanann gan (cin) mheabhla,
    As iad (assiat) cuaine saor (saer) Sadhbha,
    Abhla craobh (craebh) n-uaine n-Eamhna.

                                      VIII.
                        Emhain of the juicy apples,
                        The Tara of Manann, without disgrace;
                        The noble progeny of Sabia
                        Are the apples of the green branch of Emhain.

                   IX.
    Tusa (tussa) mac Sadhbha saoire,
    As (is) tu an slat (intshlat) abhla as (ar) aille,
    Ca dia do bhru na boinne
    Do roine ria thu a taidhe.

                                       IX.
                        Thou, the son of noble Sabia,
                        Thou the most beauteous apple rod;
                        What God from Bru of the Boyne
                        Created thee with her in secret?

                    X.
    A Raghnuill, a ri an (in) diongna,
    Ra dhruim (druim) dha (da) thi ar ti tearla (herrla)
    Do gheabhae (ghebha) a meic saoir Sadhbha,
    Labhra on leic a ttaoibh (ttaeibh) Theamhra.

                                       X.
                        O Raghnall, king of the fortress,[513]
                        If thou comest with the object of seeking it,
                        Thou wilt obtain, O son of noble Sabia,
                        A sound from the flag by the side of Tara.[514]

                   XI.
    Da madh leat sloigh fhear (bfher) bhfuinigh (fhuinidh).
    O bhoinn go mbean (cu mben) re tibhir.
    Mo dheit ar mhil ’sar mheadair (megair)
    Eamhain mheic Lir mheic Mhidhr.

                                       XI.
                        If thine were the hosts of the men of the
                           setting (the west),
                        From Boyne till it touches the Tiber,
                        Greater to thee for joy and pleasure,
                        Were the Emhain of the son of Lir, son of
                           Midir.[515]

                  XII.
    A mheic Gofraidh chaoimh (chaeimh) cruthaig,
    Nar lo traigh (traid) re taoibh (taeibh) tacair (tacoir),
    Ni miadh (miad) leath (lat) e (he) ot athair,
    Macathach (mac ath) retre ad rathaigh (rathoigh).

                                      XII.
                        O son of the fair, shapely Goffraidh,
                        That withdrawest not a foot in battle;
                        It beseems not, on thy father’s account,
                        That any man in thy time should be thy surety.

                 XIII.
    Nior (nir) uaisle (uaisli) inaoi (inai) ri Romhan,
    As (is) i do ghnaoi (ghnai) an (in) ghnaoi (ghnai) lainfhial,
    Nor uaisle rath riogh (righ) Suiriam,
    Na sgath chuilfhiar griobh (gribh) Ghailian.

                                     XIV.
                        Not nobler was the king of the Romans than thou,
                        Thy face is the generous face;
                        Not higher the fortune of the king of Syria,
                        Than that of the long-tressed griffin of
                           Gailian.[516]

                 XIV.
    Anu ni fhuighbhe (fuidbhi) Eamhain (Emain),
    Suirghe mar thu, as tu an cobhair (in chabhair),
    Tulchan mar e (he) na aghaidh,
    Faghaigh e (he) ar drumchlar domhain.

                                     XIV.
                        To-day, Emhain will not obtain
                        A lover like thee—thou art the help;
                        A hillock like it in comparison,
                        Find ye it on the surface of the earth.

                 XV.
    Doirse t’ fhearainn (ferainn) as iomdha (imdha),
    Soillse inaid (inait) sreabhainn ghorma,
    As (is) daoibh (dib) a chraobh (craebh) chuain Eamhna (Emna)
    Uaim fhearna, uaim chaomh cnodhbha (chnoghdha).

                                     XV.
                        Many are the doors of thy country,
                        Brighter than the blue rills;
                        Of them, O branch of the stock of Emhain,
                        Are the cave of Ferna, the fair cave of Knowth.

                 XVI.
    Do raghainnse gan ro (a) luing
    Is ann (in) Manainn (Manaind) se (si) mholaim
    Go mbeinn (cu mbeind) thuaidh re taobh thfearainn,
    Da leanainn uaim chaoimh chorainn.

                                     XVI.
                        I would go, without a stately ship,
                        Into this Manainn which I extol;
                        That I might be north near thy land,
                        If I followed the noble cave of Corann.

                XVII.
    Roinnfe (roindfi) ar dho Mhanuinn mhaigh (do Manaind maid) reidh,
    Ar raluing is ar ionnshloigh,
    Sleibhte ar fhud do ghort n-glainreidh
    Tug daighmheinn ort a fionn bhoinn (find bhoind).

                                    XVII.
                        The smooth-plained Manann, thou wilt divide in
                           two,
                        For fleets and also for large armies;
                        The hills along thy clear level fields,
                        That have given thee beauty, O fair Boyne.

                XVIII.
    Coisgfe ar (fher) agus airgfe,
    Loisgfe teagh agus tolgbfae (tolcfaidh),
    Nar ladh caor ar dho ceardchae,
    Seargfae ar a lar caol colpae.

                                    XVIII.
                        Thou wilt restrain menslaughter, and wilt
                           plunder,
                        Thou wilt burn houses and wilt demolish;
                        That no bolt may fall on thy forge,
                        The narrow Colpa thou wilt dry up.

                 XIX.
    Airgfe Ath cliath an chomhlainn,
    Is do sgiath ar sgath do ghlanbhuinn,
    Ait toighe ar ttocht (thocht) go Duibhlinn,
    Cuinghim ort roimhe a Raghnuill.

                                     XIX.
                        Thou wilt plunder Ath-cliath of the combat,
                        With thy shield guarding thy clear side;
                        The site of a house, on coming to Dublin,
                        I ask of thee in advance, O Raghnall.

                 XX.
    A Raghnaill, a ri an Domhnan,
    A ri dha ttabhraim (da thabhraim) tulgradh,
    Ad dhiaigh um chnoc o Colman,
    Buaidh orghan stoc is sdurghan.

                                     XX.
                        O Raghnaill, O King of the Domhnan;[517]
                        O king, to whom I give ardent love;
                        After thee, about Cnoc-O’Cholman (Tara),
                        Shall be organs, trumpets, and clarions.

                 XXI.
    Maith theangnamh, cruaidh do chroidhe,
    A fhlaith ceannghlan chuain Mhuile,
    Cloidheamh cruaidh oigfhir eile
    Beire a truaill bhroighib (broigil) bhuidhe.

                                     XXI.
                        Good thy prowess, brave thy heart,
                        O bright-headed prince of the harbour of Mull;
                        The hard sword of another young man
                        Thou wilt bear in a yellow-bordered scabbard.

                 XXII.
    Do shleagh dhearg ar dho (do) dhearnainn,
    Gach fear a searg (scarc) re a slimrinn,
    Gombi (cumbi) a grainne (graine) tre a ghlandruim (geal no glan),
    Saidhe a Raghnuill i (hi) a n-ïmlinn.

                                     XXII.
                        Thy red spear in thy right hand,
                        With (from) whose slim (sharp) point every man
                           is in love (sickness),
                        Until its edge is through the clear back,
                        Thrust it, O Raghnaill, in the navel.

                 XXIII.
    Geibhe ghlaic (glaic) a cuirr chairre (cnairre),
    Geibe shlait (slait) nduinn gan duille,
    Do theid (teit) chruinn (cruinn) shleamhain (slemain) sreinge,
    Seinne a cuirr leabhair luinge.

                                      XXIII.
                        Take, in thy round, stout hand,
                        Take a brown leafless rod,
                        Thy round smooth, strung rope,
                        Whilst we are on the poop of thy roomy ship.

                  XXIV.
    Sibhse fir na mbarc mbreactha.
    Ni mo chin tracht na ttiocfa (ticfa),
    Aitnidh dhaoibh troigh re toptha (tophta),
    Do ghoin ochta caoimh chniochta.

                                      XXIV.
                        You, ye men of the speckled barks,
                        I love not the strand to which ye come not;
                        To you is known the quick step,
                        To the wounding of the bosoms of noble knights.

                  XXV.
    A ua ghil Gofraidh Mhearaigh (Mheraigh),
    A fhir do lotraigh luirigh,
    Do mhoid (moit) a ri re (ri) rioghain (righain),
    Do dhiogail si ar a suilibh.

                                      XXV.
                        O fair descendant of Godfrey Mearagh,[518]
                        O man that hast hacked coats of mail;
                        A king has boasted to a queen,
                        That he would avenge thee before her eyes.

                 XXVI.
    A mheic (mic) Ghofraidh fheil fearrdha (fherrdha),
    A mheic reidh sochraigh shadbha,
    Dho bhloghais do moigh (bhloigh) dhomhna (domna),
    Chomhla solais ngloin ngarrdha.

                                      XXVI.
                        O son of generous manly Godfrey,
                        O mild sedate son of Sabia;
                        Thou hast broken off from Magh-Domhna (a part of
                           Domhna)
                        The clear bright garden gate.

                  XXVII.
    A ua Lachluinn na laoidheang
    A ua glan Chuinn na ngeibhionn
    Iarrfam (iarfain) cuan ar cul Arann
    Ag (ac) sur traghann nfhuar n-eirionn (n Erenn).

                                      XXVII.
                        O descendant of Lochlainn of the ships;
                        O fair descendant of Conn of the fetters;[519]
                        We will ask a harbour behind Aran,
                        Whilst searching the cold strands of Erin.

                 XXVIII.
    Iomdha (Imda) ad luing ar lar bhleighe (bleidhi),
    Ris nach buing sal na suidhe (snidi),
    Peisd is i na hor bhuidhe,
    Is duine ag ol di dighe (dhighi).

                                     XXVIII.
                        Many is the goblet in the hold of thy ship,
                        Fixed and untouched by the brine;
                        Circled by a serpent of yellow gold,
                        Out of which a man quaffs a drink.

                  XXIX.
    Deocha dod (dot) chuirm (cuirm) nom ceanglann (nomcenglann)
    Do mhuirn ga muirn nach diongbhann,
    Duadh (duna) ga nibhe ni fhoghbham,
    Mire chormann bfhuar (fuarr) bFhionnghall.

                                      XXIX.
                        Draughts of thy ale bind me;
                        What delight does not thy delight repel!
                        Fatigue in quaffing it I feel not;
                        Merrier it is than the cold ale of Fingal.[520]

                  XXX.
    Ceim (ceir) ad thigh (atigh) ar ti comhoil.
    Fir dhon fheinn a ri ad ralaimh
    Easgra (escra) caomh fad chuirm nglanthuair,
    Laom (laem) ra ghuail nguirm ar gabbail.

                                      XXX.
                        To advance into thy house to banquet,
                        Men of the Fiann, O King, are at hand,
                        Fair goblets are under thy clear cool ale,
                        As the blaze of blue coals is ascending.

                  XXXI.
    A Radhnaill a ri Cola
    Gach ni ad ghlanluing do gheabha
    Rug ar shluagh sniomh an mhara,
    Fion tana fhuar na heala.

                                      XXXI.
                        O Raghnall, O King of Coll,
                        All things in thy fair ship thou ’lt find;
                        Which to the host has the winding sea brought—
                        The thin cold wine of the swans.

                  XXXII.
    [B]og an dream re (ac) dail rochruidh,
    Fearr ina a dhail go (cu) dochraid,
    Cruaidhe ne fir re (ri) fearthoin (ferthoin),
    Fearchoin (ferchoin) cuaine (chuaine) ghil Ghofraidh.

                                      XXXII.
                        Generous the band in distributing stock;
                        Better this than to deal it niggardly;
                        Hardy the men for fighting—
                        The man-dogs of the pack of fair Godfrey.

                  XXXIII.
    Beri bhuidhin (bhuighin) mbrat ccuanda (cuanna),
    Lat do na muighibh mora
    Gluaisid gaoth dhod chionn craobha,
    Mar chaonna (caenda) fhionn mhaoth mhona (find maeth mona).

                                      XXXIII.
                        Take a company elegantly clothed
                        With thee, from the great plains.
                        May the wind blow over thy topmasts
                        Gently, as the rustling of soft white
                           moor-grass.

                  XXXIV.
    Aithne ar dho (do) bharr ag bandail (cun banail),
    Anall tar faithche fhainn fheoir,
    Gluaisid cuirn do chuil chlann uir,
    Mhall (mall) shuil nguirm n-uir (uir) dha haindeoin.

                                      XXXIV.
                        The women will admire thy head,
                        As thou comest past the prone-grassed green;
                        Before the rustling of thy youthful locks
                        The soft blue eye will unwillingly move.

                  XXXV.
    Dorad (dorat) daoibh (daibh) snuadh ar shambchnaibh,
    Ag ad (acat) shluagh a shaoir shochraig,
    Leaga corn ur re a n-aighthibh (n-aighthibh),
    Aithghin shul ngorm o n-Gofraidh.

                                      XXXV.
                        The choicest of hues on happy limbs
                        Is with thy army, O noble, honest chief;
                        As the sounding of full trumpets before their
                           faces,
                        Is the glance of the blue eye of Godfrey’s heir.

                  XXXVI.
    Do rosg (rosc) mar bhogha an (in) bharraidh (barraid),
    Ag tocht tar rogha an (in) rinn fheoir,
    Cosmhail blath do chuil choimmoir,
    Re snath bronnoir uir dhinneoin.

                                      XXXVI.
                        Thine eye is like the modest hyacinth
                        Peeping through the surface of the pointed
                           grass;
                        The hue of thy flowing locks is like
                        Fresh thread of gold from the anvil (or
                           furnace).

                  XXXVII.
    Ni tearc a craobh ur eadtrom (etrom),
    Searc (serc) dhod (dot) chul shaor mar seadbharr (sedbharr);
    Ni tug (tuc) bean (ben) ead (et) ar thogbhonn (tocbonn),
    A gheag (gheg) brogdhonn (broccdhonn) gheal gheagmhar (ghegmhar).

                                      XXXVII.
                        Not scarce, a fresh, light branch,
                        Is love for thy glorious gem-like locks;
                        No woman has been without jealousy regarding
                           thee,
                        Thou brown-white mighty scion of a great branch.

                  XXXVIII.
    A ghoill do gleire an (in) bhrogha (brogha),
    Mar teidhe (theighi) tar moing mhara,
    Ruisg chuanda (cuanna) a cuirr na heala,
    Buinn gheala gruadha glana.

                                      XXXVIII.
                        O Gall of the choicest of the Brugh,
                        As thou goest across the surface of the sea;
                        Bright are thine eyes, thou of the swan-like
                           neck,
                        The white feet and the clear cheeks.

                  XXXIX.
    Camdhlaoi ar chaoin (camdlaidarchain) do dhonnbhairr (donnbharr),
    A i (hi) Amhlaoibh shaoir sheangdhuinn,
    Red laochlaimh reidh a Raghnaill,
    Samhlaim eill maothbhain meamruim.

                                      XXXIX.
                        On thy brown head is a twisted tress,
                        Thou descendant of the noble, slender-brown
                           Amhlaibh;[521]
                        To thy soft hero-hand, O Raghnall,
                        I compare a strip of soft white parchment.

                   XL.
    Samlaim do li is li an chubhair,
    A Raghnaill as ri ar Eamhain (Emain),
    Realta (relta) ghlas mall fad (fat) mhalaigh,
    Samail bharr na n-gas n-geamhair (ngedhair).

                                       XL.
                        Thy colour I compare to the hue of foam,
                        O Raghnall, who art king over Emain;
                        Under thy brows are slow blue stars
                        Like to the tops of blades of corn-grass.

                  XLI.
    Maith thinneall chuil (tindell cuili) is cheibhe,
    Ar a silleann (sillenn) suil uaine,
    Gris chaomh ar ccar (char) a smaile,
    Aille thaobh nglan do ghruaidhe.

                                      XLI.
                        Good is thy arrangement of tresses and locks,
                        On which a blue eye looks;
                        With noble ardour is inflamed
                        The bright surface of thy cheek.

                  XLII.
    Taobh gruaidhe uir dho ionnlais,
    Craobh uaine ad (at) shuil mar shamfhrais,
    Ar fhraoch thfuilt (hfhuilt) a i (hi) Fhearghais (Fherghais),
    Do earmais (ermais) gaoth (gaeth) phuirt Parrthais.

                                             XLII.

                        Thy fair fresh cheek thou hast bathed;
                        In thine eye is a blue beam soft as summer
                           showers;
                        Over the locks of thy hair, O descendant of
                           Fergus,[522]
                        The wind of Paradise has breathed.

                  XLIII.
    A fhir na greadha gile,
    A fhir na heala duibhe,
    Garbh shaithe agus min mheile,
    Sgin (scin) eimhe blaithe buidhe.

                                      XLIII.
                        O man of the white steed;
                        O man of the black swan,
                        The fierce band and the gentle mood,
                        The sharp blade and the lasting fame.

                  XLIV.
    Tugais (tucais) ruaig mhadhma ar Maoilbheirn,
    Is badhbha uaid na hurdhuirn,
    Iomdha a n-glinn fir faonmhaidhm,
    A (o) shaorbhaidhbh ghil shing shul ghuirm.

                                      XLIV.
                        Thou hast inflicted a rout-defeat on
                           Maelbheirn;[523]
                        Fierce on thy part were the heavy blows;
                        Numerous are the men dispersed in the glen,
                        O (from the) noble bright slender blue-eyed
                           hero.

                  XLV.
    A i (hi) Chuinn, a i (hi) Chormaic,
    Gus an luing na luing raidhbhric,
    Sgaoi (scai) do chreich ar each (ereach) ionnraic,
    Do iomlait neach eich aimhghlic.

                                      XLV.
                        Descendant of Conn, and descendant of Cormac
                        Thou with the speckled ship of ships;
                        Pursue thy raids on a worthy steed;
                        For a foolish steed carries one astray.

                 XLVI.
    Olc dhuinn (dhunn) gan an (in) ghlais (glais) ghaibhnionn
       (ngaibhnenn),
    Anocht ga chul (cul) tais tiormfhann (tirmfhann),
    Olc dhunn (dhun) gan an dubh soighleann,
    Ar sgur goirmsheang ur Fhionnghall.

                                     XLVI.
                        Evil for us that the Glas-Gaibhnionn[524]
                        Is not now in her soft dry sloping corner;
                        Evil for us that the Dubh-Soinglenn[525]
                        Is not now in the brilliant stud of Fingal.

                 XLVII.
    Mo chuairt thall tuillmheach dhamhsa,
    A bharr suairc druimneach donnso,
    Do guala a ri saor seaghsa,
    Leamsa ar don i ’sa n-orsa (hi san orrsa).

                                     XLVII.
                        Profitable to me was my visit yonder,
                        O joyous, diademed, brown head;
                        Thy shoulder, O noble king of Seghais
                        Were to me equal to this gold.

                 XLVIII.
    Ar n-dol damlisa od dheaghthoigh (ot degh thoigh),
    Mhalmsa ni halmsa dochraig,
    Measa an teagh riogh dha (da) rachair,
    Marthain ag siol geal Ghofraidh.

                                     XLVIII.
                        On my going from thy good house,
                        My alms were not pitiful alms;
                        No better king’s house canst thou go to;
                        Long life to the bright race of Godfrey.

                 XLIX.
    A mheic Gofraidh ghuirt Mhuile,
    Do ghuirt gonfaidh ar n-aire,
    Tain go trachtaibh do thighe,
    Biri o thraigh mbarc ghloin m-baile.
                            Baile Suthain.

                                     XLIX.
                        O son of Godfrey of Mull’s field
                        Our attention shall thy fields retain;
                        Spoils to the shores of thy house bear thou,
                        From the bright-barbed Traigh-bhaile.[526]


                                 NOTES.

-----

Footnote 512:

                          Lugh mac Ethlenn, for whom see O’Curry’s
                          _Lectures_, p. 388.

Footnote 513:

                          Reginald, son of Godred, Norwegian King of Man
                          and the Isles from 1188 to 1226.

Footnote 514:

                          The Lia Fal at Tara, which sounded at the
                          tread of the rightful heir to the throne. See
                          O’Curry’s _Lectures_, p. 388.

Footnote 515:

                          Manannan Mac Lir, one of the Tuath De Danann.
                          He is connected by tradition with Emhain
                          Abhlach, or Emain of the apples, which is
                          explained to mean the Island of Arran. See
                          _Four Ancient Books of Wales_, vol. i. p. 78.

Footnote 516:

                          Gailian, a rude form of the name of the
                          Gaileon in Leinster, one of the three tribes
                          of the Firbolg.

Footnote 517:

                          Domhnan, another of the three tribes of the
                          Firbolg.

Footnote 518:

                          This was Godred Crovan, called in the Irish
                          Annals Gofraidh Meranach, the founder of the
                          Norwegian kingdom of Man and the Isles, and
                          ancestor of Reginald.

Footnote 519:

                          This line alludes to Reginald, son of
                          Somerled, who ruled over part of the Isles
                          from 1164 to 1204, and who was supposed to be
                          descended, through Colla Uais, from Conn of
                          the Hundred Battles, one of the traditionary
                          kings of Ireland.

Footnote 520:

                          It is doubtful whether the Ossianic hero can
                          be referred to here, or in St. 46. He never
                          appears in Irish poetry under the form of
                          Fionngall, but simply Fionn. Fionngall was a
                          name applied to the Norwegians, and to the
                          land they occupied. Hence the Lord of the
                          Isles was called in poetry ‘Ri Fhionngall,’
                          from the Islands having belonged to the
                          Norwegians.

Footnote 521:

                          Olaf Bitling, grandfather of Reginald, son of
                          Godred; but he was also grandfather of the
                          other Reginald, whose mother was his daughter.

Footnote 522:

                          Reginald, son of Somerled, was supposed to be
                          descended from a certain Gofraidh, son of
                          Fergus.

Footnote 523:

                          Perhaps Morvaren.

Footnote 524:

                          The celebrated Cow of Gaibhnen the Smith. See
                          _Annals of Four Masters_, note to A.M. 3330.

Footnote 525:

                          One of Cuchulain’s horses.

Footnote 526:

                          Dundalk strand.




                                  III.

             THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLES OF SCOTLAND.[527]


The haill Iles of Scotland were devidit in four pairts of auld, viz.
Lewis, Sky, Mule, and Yla, and the remanent haill Iles were reknit but
as pertinents and pendicles of the said four Iles, and were devidit
amangis thir four Iles and annext thairto in this manner. First to the
Ile of Lewis wes annext the Iles of Wist, Barra, Harragis, Ronalewis,
Pabla in Harreik, Helsker, Collismown, and Iit.

To the Ile of Sky were annext Raarsa, Eg, Romb, Canna, Ellan na muck,
and Scalpa.

Perteining to the Ile of Mule were Lismoir, Tuahannais, Ulloway,
Commatra, Inschkennycht, Sanct Colmisinche _alias_ Colmkill, Tireich,
and Coll.

And to the fourth Ile of Yla wes conjoynit the Iles of Dewra _alias_
Jura, Colonsa, Geiga, Rauchlyne, Seillonyng, Scarba.

But now thir Iles are becum under sundrie mens dominions, quhairthrow
thai answer not to the saids four principall Iles, yit thai keip the
lawis and uses of the samine for the maist pairt, and speciallie of
thair yeirlie dewties, as heireftir shall be declairit. Be thir Iles
foirsaids thair is mony small Ilands and Inches in Scotland, quhairof
the names are not publist, nor yit in reputation, but worthie of
habitation or descryving, quhairthrow we omitt the samyn quhill thai be
better inhabite and esteimit of.

Thair is also ane Ness passand southwest fra the lands of Ardmwrche,
quhilk Ness is called Romwrche (Point of Ardnamurchan), and divides thir
haill Iles in twa; viz. in South and North Iles, viz. the Iles of Yla
and Mule with thair saids pertinents, lyand fra the said Ness to the
south, and the Iles of Lewis and Sky to the north.

The first Ile callit Lewis is conjoynit with Harreik, but the sea cummis
almaist betwix thame, saifand ane small grip of the lenth of twa or
thrie pair of buttis, quhilk narrow grip is haldin the march betwix the
Iles of Lewis and Herreis. They are baith 40 miles of lenth, quhairof
Lewis is 32 miles, and Herreis 8 miles. The pairt of this Ile that is
callit Lewis perteins to McCloyd Lewis. His kin are callit Clan Leod,
_alias_ callit Sheill Torquill, that is, the offspring of that man namet
Torquill. His principall place thair is callit the Castell of Steornoay,
and he may raise on this pairt of this Ile callit Lewis 700 men with
Rona, by thame that labours the ground, of the quhilkis nane are
chairgit or permittit to gang to ony oisting or weiris in all the haill
Iles, but are commandit to remane at hame to labour the ground.

This Ile of Lewis is very profitable and fertile alswell of corns as all
kind of bestiall wild fowl and fishes, and speciallie of beir, sua that
thair will grow commonlie 20, 18, or at the leist 16 bolls beir yeirlie
eftir ilk bolls sawing. It is 40 lb. land of auld extent and pay is
yeirlie 18 score chalders of victuall, 58 score of ky, 32 score of
wedderis, and ane great quantitie of fisches, pultrie, and quhyte
plaiding by thair Cuidichies, that is, feisting thair master quhen he
pleases to cum in the cuntrie, ilk ane thair nicht or twa nichtis about,
according to thair land and labouring.

Thair is na great waters nor rivers in this Ile, but small schaule
burnis quhairby the salmond and uther fishes swymming thairupon will
appear twa pairt dry for fault of water to cover thame, and are slane
with treis and bastonnis, and hes na uthir craft nor ingyne to slay
thame. Thair is na woods in the Lewis, but ane great wildernes or forest
callit Osirsdaill, quhairin is sustenit mony deir, thairfor it is
pleasant hunting.

In this Ile thair is ane little Cove biggit in form of ane kirk, and is
callit the Pygmies Kirk. It is sa little, that ane man may scairslie
stand uprichtlie in it eftir he is gane in on his kneis. Thair is sum of
the Pygmies banes thairinto as yit, of the quhilkis the thrie banes
being measurit is not fullie twa inches lang.

The uther pairt of this Ile callit Harrayis perteins to McCloyd Harreis.
His kin and surname is callit Sheall Tormoyd, that is, the offspring of
that man callit Tormoyd, and albeit this man McCloyd hes landis, as ye
shall heir heireftir, and that his principall place callit Dunvegane be
in the Ile of Sky, yit he is stylit be this Ile of Herreis. He may raise
seven score of able men. This Ile of Herries is also fertile,
commodious, and profitable in all sorts effeirand to the quantitie
thairof as the Ile of Lewis. Thair is nather woods, great waters, nor
rivers thairin, but small burnis as in the Ile of Lewis, and the people
thairof as unskilfull in slaying of the fishes and salmond that cummis
as thair neighbours are.

Thair is ane fair forrest called Otterisdaill in this Ile, quhairin is
mony deer and thairthrow pleasand hunting, albeit it be but 20 merk land
of auld extent. This Ile payis 3 bolls malt and 3 bolls meill for ilk
day in the yeir, 40 mairtis and eight score wedderis, by customs,
pultrie, meill, with oist silver.

The Ile of Wist is 40 miles of length, but of small breid, and the north
pairt thairof perteins to ane clan callit Clandoneill, the south pairt
thairof to Clan Ranald. The haill is reknit to be sevenscore merk land,
quhairof the Clan Doneill hes threescore merk land, and the Clan Ranald
fourscore merk land. The Clan Doneill on thair pairt thairof will raise
300 men, and the Clan Ranald on thair pairt thairof will raise 300 men.
Thair is na woods nor great rivers in it, but thair is mony deir in it.
Ilk merk land in this Ile payis 20 bolls victuall, by all uther
customes, maills, and oist silver, quhairof thair is na certane rentall.
The customes of this Ile are splendit, and payit at the Landslordis
cumming to the Ile to his Cudicht.

The Ile of Barra perteins to McNeill Barra. His surname and kin are
callit Clan Neill. His principall dwelling-place thair is callit
Keissadull, quhilk is ane excellent strenth, for it standis on the
seaside under ane great craig, sua that the craig cummis over it, and na
passage to the place but be the sea, quhairof the entrie is narrow, but
that ane scheip may pass throw, and within that entres is an round
heavin and defence for schippis from all tempestis. This Ile is five
miles of lenth or thairby, and is 20 lb. land, and may raise on this
Ile, with four or five small Iles that he hes beside it, 200 gude men.
Item, in this Ile is ane weill quhairin growis cockles, quhilk is at the
fute of ane hill callit the Hill of Barra, twa mile fra the sea.

Rona[528] (Bernera) Lewis is ane Ile of four mile long perteining to
McCloyd Lewis, and it is 80 merk land. It payis 120 bolls victuall
yeirly by all uther customes and maillis. It is verie fertile of corns
and store of gudes and quhyte fisches, but saltis na fisches, but eittis
thair staiking and castis the rest on the land, and will raise 60 men.

Pabba is ane little Ile ane mile lang. It perteins to McCloyd Hereik,
and albeit it be but twa merk land, it payis yeirlie 60 bollis victuall,
and will raise 40 gude men to the weiris. Bernera[528] (Rona) is ane
uther little Ile of the lyk quantitie and payment, perteining to McCloyd
Hereik.

Helsker is ane gude, commodious, and fertile Ile, alsweill of gudes as
of corns; for albeit it be but ane mile lang and ane merk land of auld
extent, it payis yeirlie to the monasterie of Colmkill, to quhom it
apperteins, 60 bollis victuall by uther customes. It is possesst evir by
ane gentill man of the Clandonald. Thair is nather moss nor woods in
this Ile, but all manurit arable land. It will raise 20 or 24 men.

Colsmon is but ane little Ile of ane quarter mile lang and als mekell
breid, quhairin is na inhabite nor manurit land, but lyes waist. Mony
fisches resortis and hantis thairto and generis within the same; and the
principall man of the north end of Wyist, wha is ane of the Clandoneill
(as said is), passes with ane number of men in cumpanie anes in the yeir
to this Ile, and slayis and takis sa many as they please of the selches,
and careyis away with thame.

Irt (St. Kilda) is ane little Ile of ane mile lang, perteining to
McCloyd Hereik. It is maist fertile of scheip and foullis, quhairof it
payis ane great matter yeirlie to the said McCloyd and his factors. And
albeit thay use na pleuchis, but delvis thair corn land with spaiddis,
yet thai pay yeirlie 60 bollis victuall. Thair is na horse nor meiris in
this Ile, and but few nolt to the number of 60 or thairby. Thair cummis
na men furth of this Ile to oisting or weiris, becaus they are but a
poor barbarous people unexpert that dwellis in it, useand na kind of
wappinis; but thair daylie exercitation is maist in delving and
labouring the ground, taking of foullis and gaddering thair eggis,
quhairon thay leif for the maist pairt of thair fude. Thay make na
labour to obtene or slay ony fisches, but gadderis sum in the craigis,
albeit thai micht have abundance thairof utherwayis gif thai wald ony
way make labour thairfore. Anes in the yeir ane Priest or Minister
cummis to thame and baptizes all the bairnis born amangis thame sin his
last being thair, and celebrattis marriage to the parteis desyrand, and
makes sic uther ministration of the sacraments to thame as he thinkis
gude, and gifts thame sic directiounis as he wills thame to use and keip
for ane yeir thairefter, and gadderis payment of thair teinds (quhilk
thai pay maist thankfullie and justlie of ony people), and departs
quhill the next yeir agane. In all times thai sustenit ane auld priest
or clerk continuallie amangis thame, to shaw and tell to thame the halie
dayis to be keipit in the yeir.

The Ile of Sky is ane Ile 40 mile lang and alsmuckle of breid, swa that
it is almaist round. It perteinit all haill in auld times to McConneill,
but now be his disposition thair is divers heritors of sundrie pairts
thairof, the maist thereof extending to 80 merk land lyand almaist in
the middis of the Ile caleit Trouternes, and 30 merk land lyand at the
south pairt of the Ile quhilk is caleit Slait. It pertenis to Scheall
Hutcheoun, that is to say, the offspring of that man callit Hutcheoun,
but his principall surname is Clandoneill.

Trouternes payis yeirlie ilk merk land thairof twa bollis meill, twa
bollis malt, four mairtis, 16 wedderis, 16 dozen of pultrie, twa merks
by the auld maills and utheris dewteis accustomat. Thair was ane castell
in Trouternes callit Duncolmen, quhairof the wallis standis yit.

Slait is occupiet for the maist pairt be gentlemen, thairfore it payis
but the auld deuteis, that is, of victuall, buttir, cheis, wyne, aill,
and aquavite, samekle as thair maister may be able to spend being ane
nicht (albeit he were 600 men in companie) on ilk merk land. There is
twa strenthie castells in Slait, the ane callit Castell Chammes, the
uther Dunskeith. Trouternes will raise 500 men, and Slait 700 men. Ane
pairt of this Ile of Sky callit Strathvardeill pertenis to ane Laird
callit McKynvin, given to him be McConneill for to be judge and decide
all questionnis and debaitts that happenis to fall betwin pairties throw
playing at cairtis or dyce or sic uther pastime, and will raise aucht
score men. McKynvin hes a castell thair callit Dewnakin. McCloyd Lewis
hes 20 merk land in this Ile callit Watternes, quhairon he will raise
200 men. McCloyd Herreis hes three cuntries in this Ile, the first
callit Durenes quhilk is 28 merk land, and will raise twelf score men,
quhairin he hes ane strenthie dwelling place. The second callit
Bracadale, quhilk is 16 merk land, and will raise sevin score men. Thair
is mony woods in all pairtis of this Ile of Sky, speciallie birkis and
orne; but the maist wood is in Slait and Trouternes. Thair is ane wood
in Slait, of aucht mile of lenth, with mony deer and rae, and it is
verie fertile, with all kinds of bestiall and corns. Thair is great
plentie of salmond and hering tane in this Ile. Thair is mony lochis in
this Ile, and speciallie in Strathvardill, quhilk is callit Loch Slepan,
Loch na Neist, and Loch na Daill. Betwixt Trouternes and Strathtodill
lyes ane loch callit Loch Sleggasthe.

Raarsa is ane Ile of five mile lang and thrie mile braid, perteining to
the Bischop of the Iles; but it is occupiet and possest be ane gentleman
of McCloyd Lewis kin, callit Gillechallum Raarsa. His offspring bruikis
the same yit, and are callit Clan Gillehallum of Raarsa. He hes ane
strange little castell in this Ile, biggit on the heid of ane heich
craig, and is callit Prokill. It is but 8 merk land, and will raise 80
men. It payis yeirlie to the bischop 16 merks, but to the capitaine
thairof it payis of sundrie tributes better nor 500 merks. Thair is na
woods, but great heich craigis in this Ile. It is commodious for corn
and all kinds of bestiall, and chieflie horses.

Eg is ane Ile verie fertile and commodious baith for all kind of
bestiall and corns, speciallie aittis, for eftir everie boll of aittis
sawing in the same ony yeir will grow 10 or 12 bollis agane. It is 30
merk land, and it perteins to the Clan Rannald, and will raise 60 men to
the weiris. It is five mile lang and three mile braid. Thair is mony
coves under the earth in this Ile, quhilk the cuntrie folks uses as
strenthis hiding thame and thair geir thairintill; quhairthrow it
hapenit that in March, anno 1577, weiris and inmitie betwix the said
Clan Renald and McCloyd Herreik, the people with ane callit Angus John
McMudzartsonne, their capitane, fled to ane of the saidis coves, taking
with thame thair wives, bairnis, and geir, quhairof McCloyd Herreik
being advertisit landit with ane great armie in the said Ile, and came
to the cove and pat fire thairto, and smorit the haill people thairin to
the number of 395 persones, men, wyfe, and bairnis.

Romb is ane Ile of small profit, except that it conteins mony deir, and
for sustentation thairof the same is permittit unlabourit, except twa
townis. It is thrie miles of lenth, and alsmekle of breid, and all
hillis and waist glennis, and commodious only for hunting of deir. It
perteinis heretablie to ane Barron callit the Laird of Challow (Coll),
quha is of McClanes kin, but is possest and in the handis of
Clan-Rannald. It is ten merk land, and will raise 6 or 7 men.

Canna. This Ile is gude baith for corn and all kind of bestiall. It
perteins to the Bischop of the Iles, but the said Clan-Rannald hes it in
possessioun. It is thrie mile lang and ane braid. It is six merk land
and will raise 20 men. In this Ile is ane heich craig callit Corignan
weill braid on the heicht thairof, and but ane strait passage, that men
may scairslie climb to the heid of the craig, and quhan the cuntrie is
invadit the people gadderis thair wives and geir to the heid of the
craig and defend thame selfis utherwayis the best thay may, and will not
pass to the craig, because it may not be lang keepit onlie for fault of
water.

Ellan na Muk is but ane little Ile of ane mile lang and half mile braid.
It perteins also to the foirsaid Bischop, and is possesst be the Laird
of Ardinmwrthe callit Maken. It is four merk land, and payis to the said
Laird and his factors aucht score bollis victuall, quhairof four score
to the Bischop and four score to the Laird. It will raise to the weiris
16 able men.

Scalpa is four merk land perteining heritablie to McClane, gevin to him
be McConneill. It is thrie mile lang, twa mile braid, mair fertile and
commodious for deir and hunting nor it is ather for corns or store. It
will raise 20 men.

Mule. This Ile is 24 mile of lenth and in sum pairtis 16 mile braid, and
in uther pairtis thairof but 12 mile braid. It is all 300 merk land, and
will raise 900 men to the weiris. McClane Doward, callit Great McClane,
hes the maist pairt thairof, extending to aucht score merk land and ten,
and will raise on it with the pairt he hes of the Bischop 600 men
thairupon. McClane of Lochbuy hes thriescore merk land, and will raise
200 men thairon. The Bischop hes 30 merk land thair, but McClane Doward
hes it in his possession occupiet be his kin. The Laird of McKynvin hes
20 merk land, and the uthir 20 merk land pertenis to the Laird of
Schellow (Coll) but thay will raise 100 thairon. Thair is mony woods and
saltwater lochis in this Ile, and it is verie plentifull of all kind of
fisches, speciallie hering and salmond. It is na less commodious for
guides and store nor ony of the remanent Iles; but not sa gude for
cornes. In everie pairt thairof are mony deiris, raes, and wild foullis.
McClaue of Doward hes twa castellis in this Ile, the ane named Doward,
the uther callit Aross, quhilk sumtime perteinit to McConneill. McClane
of Lochbuy hes ane castell thairintill callit the Castell of Lochinbuy.
Ilk merkland in this Ile payis yeirlie 5 bollis beir, 8 bollis meill, 20
stanes of cheese, 4 stanes of buttir, 4 mairtis, 8 wedderis, twa merk of
silver, and twa dozen of pultrie, by Cuddiche, quhanevir thair master
cummis to thame.

Lismoir is ane Ile of aucht mile lang lairge, and twa mile breid. It is
80 merk land of auld, and pertenit sumtime to McConneill, but now to my
Lord Argile the twa pairt thairof, and the third pairt thairof to the
Laird of Glenurquhir. McCowle of Lorn hes the stewardship of the haill
Ile and manrent thairof, and will raise thairon to ony weir 100 men. It
is very fertile for all kind of corns and speciallie for beir, and will
grow alsmekle eftir ane boll sawing as in the Lewis or ony pairt thair
with less gudeing or labour; for in mony pairtis thairof are great
mosses, and thay will cast ane fowssie or stank throw the ane pairt of
the moss, quhairby the water may easier pass away, and teillis syne the
remanent of the moss, sa far at the leist as becumis dry be vertue of
the fowssie castin, and takis it that thai cast out of the fowssie and
guidis the teillit earth thairwith, and thairon will grow the best beir
in the Iles, of sic quantitie that I think shame to write it, albeit
that I have honest authors to affirm the same. It is plane land without
ony woodis or hillis, but all manurit land and moss. It is commodious
also for nolt and horses, but best for cornes. It is gude for saltwater
fisches, and na uther. It has na set rentall of dewtie, because it is
everie yeir alterit or set. Thair is twa castellis thairin upon the
pairt perteining to my Lord Argile, ane callit Dunnagaill, but it is not
mantenit, albeit it wes of auld ane great strenth for saltwater fisches,
ane uther callit the castell of Auchindewne, upon the west side thairof
anent the Mule, quhilk wes biggit be ane Bischop of the Iles. On the
uther Laird Glenurquhirts pairt thairof wes ane auld castill callit
Bealwothar, but is not mantenit.

The twa Iles callit the Hwnayis, the ane thairof and maist pertenis to
ane kinsman of the said McCoule of Lorn. It is twa mile lang and ane
braid, ane plane land but ony hills, but all arable land, moss and
birkin wood, quhairthrow it is onlie gude for corn, nolt, and horse; it
is 8 merk land. The uther pertenis to John Stewart of Hoping (Appin); it
is ane mile lang and half mile braid; it is four merk land. The said
John Stewart hes it all under maynes, and quhan he settis the same it
payis six score bollis victuall, by all uther dewties. Baith thir Iles
will raise three score men.

Ulloway is ane Ile twa mile lang, ane mile braid. It is twelf merk land
perteining to McCower (McQuarrie). It is plane land but ony hillis or
woodis, and will raise thrie score men. Ilk merk land payis conform to
the Ile of Mule.

Coamatra is ane Ile of ane mile lang conteinand but twa towns. It is
four merk land, and pertenis to McClane of Dowart; it is plane, fair,
and verie commodious for corns and catell of sa mekle. It payis yeirlie
as Mule payis. It will raise 16 or 20 men.

Inschenycht (Inchkenneth) is ane Ile perteining to the said McClane, of
a lyke lenth, halding payment and commodities in all sortis as the said
Ile of Coamatra.

Sanct Colms Inche (Iona) is ane Ile ane mile lang, large half mile
braid, but is 30 merk land. In this Ile is the Bischop of the Iles
principall dwelling places. Thair is twa religious places—ane thairof
for monkis, ane uther for nunnes. In this Ile is the sepulchre of all
the kingis of Scotland of auld. It is verie commodious for corns and
catell, but na woodis nor mosses, quhairthrow thai are scant of fire,
but that that cummis to thame furth of other Iles be sea. In this are
all the Gentlemen of the Iles buryit as yit.

Collow (Coll) is ane Ile of 12 mile of lenth, 4 or 6 mile of breid in
sum pairtis thairof. It is 30 merk land, and pertenis to the Laird of
Collow, quhairin he hes ane castell callit Brekauche, quhilk is ane
great strenth be reason of the situation thairof verie neir to the sea,
quhilk defendis the half thairof, and hes three walls about the rest of
the castell and thairof biggit with lyme and stane, with sundrie gude
devises for defending of the tower. Ane uther wall about that, within
the quhilk schippis and boittis are drawin and salvit. And the third and
the uttermost wall of tymber and earth, within the quhilk the haill
gudes of the cuntrie are keipit in tyme of troublis or weiris. It is
very fertile alsweill of corns as of all kind of catell. Thair is sum
little birkin woodis within the said Ile. Ilk merk land payis yeirlie as
is declarit of the Ile of Mule, and will raise seven score men.

Tierhie (Tiree) is ane Ile of aucht mile of lenth, and in sum pairtis
but thrie mile braid, and at the braidest is six mile braid. But it is
commodious and fertile of corns and store of gudes. It is 140 merk land,
and will raise to the weiris 300 men. It pertenis to great McClane of
Doward, gevin to him be McConneill. It was callit in all tymes
McConnells girnell; for it is all teillit land, and na girs but ley
land, quhilk is maist nurischand girs of ony other, quhairthrow the ky
of this Ile abundis sa of milk that thai are milkit four times in the
day. The yeirlie dewtie thairof is sa great of victuall, buttir, cheis,
mairtis, wedderis, and other customes, that it is uncertain to the
inhabitants thairof quhat, thai should pay, but obeyis and payis
quhatevir is cravet be thair maister for thair haill deuties, only to
tak sa mony firlotts as micht stand side be side round about the haill
Ile full of victuall, half meill, half beir, and it wes refuseit.

Ila is ane Ile of 24 mile lang and twenty mile braid. It is 18 score
merk land, and will raise 800 men. McClane of Doward hes the half
thairof, and the other half pertenis to ane of the Clan Donald cum of
McConneills house. This Ile is plenteous of woodis, quhairin are mony
deir, raes, and wild foullis. It is also commodious for all kinds of
fisches, and speciallie salmond, be reason of diverse rivers rynnand
throw the same, quhairin swymes not only mony salmond, but in all the
small burnis of this Ile are multipill of salmond and other fisches.
McClane hes ane strenthie castell thairin, quhilk standis in ane niche
within ane fresche-water loch callit Lochgormen; the uther castell
pertenis to the Cland-donald, it is callit Downerie. Ilk merk land in
this Ile payis yeirlie three mairtis and ane half, 14 wedderis, 2 geis,
4 dozen and 8 pultrie, 5 bollis malt with ane peck to ilk boll, 6 bollis
meill, 20 stane of cheis, and twa merk of silver. And ilk merk land man
sustein daylie and yeirlie ane gentleman in meit and claith, quhilk dois
na labour, but is haldin as ane of their maisters household men, and man
be sustenit and furneisit in all necessaries be the tennent, and he man
be reddie to his maisters service and advis. Ilk town in this Ile is twa
merk land and ane half, and payis yeirlie of Gersum at Beltane four ky
with calf, four zowis with lamb, four geis, nine hennis, and 10s. of
silver.

Jura, _alias_ Deura, is 24 mile lang, and 8 mile braid quhair it is
braidest. It is 30 merk land. The half pairt thairof pertenis to the
said McClane, and the uther half to the Clan Donald. The haill will
raise, with the Ile of Scarba (quhilk is baith but ane parochin), 100
men. Sa mekle as is labourit and teillit of this Ile is excellent land,
and verie fertile for corns; but it is for the maist pairt wildernes and
woodis, quhairin is mony deir, raes, and other wild beistis, quhairthrow
thair is better hunting in this Ile nor ony of the rest. Sa mekle
labourit land as is in this Ile, it payis alike to Ila of dewties.

Collonsa and Orandsay are baith ane Ile, except that the full sea of the
flwde flowis in betwix thame. Collonsa is 18 mile of lenth and five mile
braid. It is 30 merk land, and pertenis to the Laird thairof callit
Makasie (Macduffy), ane dependar on the Clan Donald. Orandsay is but ane
mile of lenth, and alsmekle of breid. It is 4 merk land, quhairin is but
ane town, quhilk is an abbay place dedicat to St. Columb, it pertenis to
the Bischop of the Iles. Thir twa Iles will raise 100 men, and payis
according to the Ile of Ila. Na woodis nor wildernes is in thir Isles,
but all teillit land.

Seill is ane Ile of 5 mile lang, thrie mile braid, and is threescore
merk land. It pertenis to the Earle of Argile, and will raise thairon
six score men. It is all plane manurit land, but ony wildernes or
woodis, quhairby it is verie fertile of store and corns and payis
zeirlie conform as we have spoken before of the Ile of Lismoir.

Loyng is ane little Ile thrie mile lang, twa myle braid, and is fourty
merk land. It pertens heritablie to my Lord Argile, but McClane Doward
hes it of my Lord Argile for service. This Ile payis zeirlie of mairtis
and ferme as Lismoir and Seill payis.

Scarba is ane Ile thrie mile lang and twa mile breid. It is 4 merk land,
and pertenis to McClane of Lochbuy in heritage. It is all woodis and
craigis, except twa tounis, and thairfore it is better for sustentation
of bestiall nor for cornes. It payis zeirlie samekle as is labourit
thairof, as the remanent Iles payis, and will raise 17 men.

Geiza (Gigha) is ane Ile of five mile lang, twa mile braid, and is 30
merk land; it pertenis to the Clan Donald. It is very plane, profitable,
and fertile land for all kind of corns, but any woodis, hillis, or
craigis; and ilk merkland thairof payis as Ila payis, except in mairtis
and wedderis, because it is not gude for store. It will raise 100 men.

Rauchlynne is an Ile five mile lang, thrie or four mile braid; it is 30
merk land. It pertenis to the Clan Donald, and is but four mile of sea
fra Irland. It is fair, fertile, and profitable baith for girs and corn,
with sum grene hillis in it, and na woodis nor craigis. Thairfore thair
zeirlie dewtie is conform to use and consuetude of Ireland, quhilk is to
sustein ane number of men in meit and fie, and payis ane certane
quantitie of all kind of thing that growis amangis thame anes in the
yeir to thair maister, and sum taxations as thair maister happens to
have ado, and may raise 100 men. Thair is ane auld castell, verie
strenthie, callit the Auld Castell.

Thair is twa Iles that pertenis to thir saids four Iles named Arran and
Boyd (Bute). Arran is 24 miles lang, 12 and 8 miles in sum pairtis
braid, and is 300 merk land, perteining to my Lord Hamiltoun, quhairin
is twa castells. Arran will raise 100 men. Boyd is aucht mile lang, four
mile braid, quhairin stands ane great Burrowstown callit Rosa. It will
raise 300 men, and is of na less commoditie and profit nor Arran.

Thir haill Iles abovewritten, gif thai were on ane end, are fourteen
score and twelve mile of lenth and            miles of breid. The common
accustomat of raising of thair men is 6000 men, quhairof the 3d pairt
extending to 2000 men aucht and sould be cled with attounes and
haberchounis, and knapshal bannetts, as thair lawis beir. And in raising
or furthbringing of thair men ony time of yeir to quhatsumevir cuntrie
or weiris, na labourers of the ground are permittit to steir furth of
the cuntrie quhatevir thair maister have ado, except only gentlemen
quhilk labouris not, that the labour belonging to the teiling of the
ground and wynning of thair corns may not be left undone, albeit thai
byde furth ane haill zeir, as ofttimes it happins quhen ony of thair
particular Ilands hes to do with Irland or neighbours, that the haill
cuntriemen bides furth watching thair enemies ane zeir, half ane zeir,
or thairby, as thai please. Not the les the ground is not the war
labourit, nor the occupiers thairof are nather molestit, requirit,
troublit, nor permittit to gang furth of thair awin cuntrie and Ile
quhair thay dwell.

                                 Finis.


                                 NOTES.

-----

Footnote 527:

  This description must have been written between 1577 and 1595, as the
  former date is mentioned in connection with the cruel slaughter of the
  inhabitants of Egg by the Macleods, and John Stewart of Appin, who
  died in 1595, is mentioned as alive at the time it was written. It has
  all the appearance of an official report, and was probably intended
  for the use of James the Sixth, who was then preparing to attempt the
  improvement of the Isles, and increase the royal revenue from them.
  See Gregory’s _History of the Highlands and Islands_, ch. vi.

Footnote 528:

  The names of Rona and Bernera have been here misplaced. The larger
  island is obviously Bernera, and the smaller Rona.




                                  IV.

 On the AUTHENTICITY of the LETTERS PATENT said to have been granted by
        King WILLIAM THE LION to the EARL of MARR in 1171.[529]


This deed was first made known by the learned antiquary John Selden, who
printed it in his ‘Titles of Honor’ (p. 700) to illustrate his remarks
upon the title of Thane. It is in the form of letters patent, and not of
a charter; and is addressed by William, King of Scots, to all bishops,
earls, abbots, priors, barons, knights, thanes, and provosts, and all
other good men of the whole land, as well cleric as laic. It then
narrates that Morgund, son of Gillocher, formerly Earl of Marr, had come
before the king at Hindhop Burnemuthe, in his new forest, on the tenth
day of the calends of June, in the year of grace 1171, demanding his
right to the whole earldom of Marr, before the common council and army
of the kingdom of Scotland there assembled: that the king had caused
inquisition to be made into his claim by several men worthy of credit,
who were barons and thanes of his kingdom, and who found that Morgund
was the lawful son and heir of the said Gillocher, Earl of Marr; upon
which the king granted and restored to Morgund the whole earldom of
Marr, in which his father Gillocher had died vest and seized, to be held
by the said Morgund and his heirs of the king and his heirs in fee and
heritage, with all pertinents, liberties, and rights, as freely,
quietly, fully, and honourably as any other earl in the kingdom of
Scotland; he and his heirs rendering to the king and his heirs the
‘forinsecum servicium videlicet servicium Scoticanum,’ as his ancestors
had been wont to render to the king and his ancestors. Further, on the
same day and at the same place, after doing homage before the common
council of the kingdom, the said Morgund demanded that right should be
done him for the whole earldom of Moray, in which Gillocher his father
had died vest and seized; upon which petition, inquisition having been
made by several men worthy of credit, who were barons, knights, and
thanes of the kingdom, they found that Morgund was the true and lawful
heir of the earldom of Moray; and because at that time the king was
engaged in the heavy war between him and the English, and the men of
Moray could not be subjected to his will, he was unable to do justice to
Morgund, he promised that, when he could terminate the war between him
and his enemies, and subjugate the rebels of Moray, he would well and
truly recognise the right of Morgund and his heirs to the earldom of
Moray. And in order to certiorate to others this deed, the king gave
these letters patent to the said Morgund. They then conclude with these
words: ‘Teste meipso eodem anno die et loco supradicto.’ This is
undoubtedly a very remarkable production, if genuine; and Selden adds:
‘I have it writ in parchment in a hand of the time wherein it is dated,
but without any seal to it.’ It is referred to by Lord Hailes in his
additional case for the Countess of Sutherland, without any doubt being
expressed as to its authenticity; and no suspicion seems to have
attached to it till the late George Chalmers assailed it in 1819 in a
paper printed in the nineteenth volume of the ‘Archæologia’ (p. 241). In
this paper he proposes to show that this document is supposititious. He
states his objections to it under nine heads, and concludes that Selden
had been imposed upon with a spurious deed. His first objection relates
to the orthography of the document; the second to the formula of the
address; the third to the history of the earldom; the fourth to the
minuteness of the date; the fifth to the reserved services; the sixth to
the claim to the earldom of Moray; the seventh to the allusion to the
war with England; the eighth to the form of letters patent; and the
ninth to the words ‘teste meipso,’ which is peculiar to letters patent
as distinguished from charters, which at this period invariably have a
list of witnesses. The form ‘teste meipso’ first occurs, he says, in
1190.

Professor Cosmo Innes, in his preface to the first volume of the ‘Acts
of Parliament,’ alludes to this document, ‘the authenticity of which,’
he says, ‘however, is very doubtful;’ and he prints it in a note with
the following remarks; ‘Selden’s authority is not lightly to be
rejected; and some of the reasons against the genuineness of this
charter, urged by the late Mr. Chalmers in a paper in the “Archæologia,”
founded on the spelling, etc., are of no weight. But it is open to
serious objections, whether we consider the narrative or the occasion,
and the time and place of its granting and the manner of testing. For
instance, it is almost certain that in 1171 there was no war with
England. On the other hand, it is difficult to devise a motive for
inventing such a document. If it should be considered a very early
forgery it is scarcely less important than if admitted to be genuine’
(p. 13). Professor Innes’s authority on such a question is of course
very great; and not less so is that of the late Dr. Joseph Robertson. He
says, in the ‘Antiquities of the Shires of Aberdeen and Banff,’ vol. iv.
p. 691, that ‘Earl Morgund is said to have been the son of Gillocher,
Earl of Marr. But this rests only on the letters patent of King William
the Lion, first printed by Selden, which I think it is impossible to
receive as authentic. The facts which they set forth may perhaps be true
in part, but as a whole I don’t see how they are to be reconciled with
what is elsewhere recorded on undoubted authority. Nor do I think that
the letters can be successfully defended from the objections to them on
other grounds—such as their style, the time and place of granting, and
the manner of testing. I must, therefore, believe them to be spurious.
It is obvious, at the same time, that they were forged at an early
period. The learned and accurate Selden thought them to be in a hand of
the time, and they seem to be alluded to in the year 1291. They may have
been forged at that time, or more probably during the contests for the
earldom of Marr between the earl in possession and Thomas Durward before
1228, and between Earl William and Alan Durward in 1257. These contests
supply what seems to have been thought wanting—”a motive for inventing
such a document.”’

In the main I concur with the opinions of the late Professor Innes and
Dr. Joseph Robertson, and especially with that of the latter, which
shows his usual acuteness and sagacity. I consider that the first and
second objections made by Chalmers have no weight. With regard to the
third, which is that the deed is inconsistent with the known history of
the earldom, there is good reason for thinking that some such
transaction really took place; for Sir Francis Palgrave prints, in his
‘Documents and Records relating to the Affairs of Scotland,’ preserved
in the Treasury of Her Majesty’s Exchequer, an appeal prepared in the
name of the seven earls of Scotland, and of the community of the realm,
to Edward the First of England, which concludes with the following
memorandum: ‘That when William, King of Scotland, restored to Morgund,
son of Gyloclery, the predecessor of the Lord Dovenald, Earl of Marr,
this earldom of Marr, according as the same is contained in a writing
which Dovenald, Earl of Marr, possesses, there was wanting then to the
said Morgund, and there is still wanting to the earl, three hundred
pound land, partly in domain and partly in holdings and more, for which
he claims that right should be done him’ (Palgrave, p. 21). The writing
here referred to seems to have been this very deed. The fourth and fifth
objections have also no weight. Hindhop Burnemuthe is a hamlet on the
coast about five or six miles south of Berwick, and there is no
improbability in there having been a royal forest there while
Northumberland belonged to the Scottish king. With regard to the sixth
objection, that the Earl of Marr could have no claim to the earldom of
Moray, the documents printed by Sir Francis Palgrave, in connection with
the competition for the crown, do show that the Earl at that time did
claim to represent the earldom of Moray; for in the same document
Dovenald, Earl of Marr, appeals in name of himself as one of the seven
earls of Scotland, and _in name of the freemen of Moray_, and the other
relations, connections, and friends of the said Earl. But while I reject
all these grounds of objection as not conclusive, I am obliged to admit
that the seventh objection, which relates to the allusion to the war
with England, and to insurrection in Moray, is fatal to the authenticity
of the deed. The war with England did not commence till two years
afterwards, in 1173; and the insurrection in Moray broke out after the
captivity of the king in 1174, and Moray continued in a state of
rebellion from that year till 1181. But during the first eight years of
King William’s reign he was at peace with England, and there was no
appearance of the royal authority not having been recognised in Moray.
Unfortunately it is during this period that the supposed letters patent
are dated. Then as to the last two objections, which relate to the form
of the deed as letters patent, and form of the testing, ‘teste meipso,’
there is no instance, so far as I am aware, of this form being used at
as early a period as the reign of William the Lion.

It is somewhat remarkable, that while these distinguished antiquaries
were discussing the question of the authenticity of the letters patent
as printed by Selden, it seems never to have occurred to any of them to
endeavour to ascertain what became of the original, which Selden said he
possessed, and whether it might not be recovered. Selden left his papers
to Sir Matthew Hale, and Hale left his to the benchers of Lincoln’s Inn,
by whom they were deposited in their library. The search was therefore
not a difficult one, and on examining these papers the so-called
original was at once found, which I have had photographed by the
autotype process. It is undoubtedly a very old document, but not so old
as the reign of King William the Lion. The handwriting is, I think, that
of the early part of the reign of King Alexander the Third, and it must
have existed prior to the document printed by Sir Francis Palgrave
already quoted. In this reign, too, there are frequent specimens of
deeds in the form of letters patent with the form of ‘teste meipso.’
Three of them are printed in the National MSS. of Scotland, Nos. 62, 63,
and 64, and dated respectively in 1261, 1275, and 1282, and if the
handwriting is compared it will be seen at once that this document
belongs to the same period. The Earl of Marr at this time was William,
grandson of Morgund by his son Duncan. He was one of the most powerful
barons of Scotland at the time, and was chamberlain of Scotland in 1252.
He was one of those who were removed from the administration of affairs
in Scotland at the instance of King Henry the Third of England in 1255,
being replaced, among others, by Alan Durward. He was recalled to the
king’s council in 1257, and took a leading part in Scotland till the
year 1273, when he appears to have died. Now we find that in 1257 a
question was raised between Alan Durward and William, Earl of Marr, as
to the right of the latter to the earldom. A papal rescript issued in
that year, directing an inquest to be held, proceeds on the narrative
that ‘Our beloved son the nobleman Alan called the Dorrward hath
signified to us that, whereas the nobleman William of Marr of the
diocese of Aberdeen hath withheld the earldom of Marr of right belonging
to the aforesaid Alan, and the same doth occupy to the prejudice of him
the said Alan, and that Morgund and Duncan deceased, to whom the said
William asserts his succession in the said earldom, were not begotten in
lawful matrimony,’ William, however, remained in possession, and
certainly the production of a charter finding that Morgund was the
lawful son and heir of his father, and containing a grant of the earldom
to him and his heirs, would be most opportune in determining this
question, and, if a genuine deed of this kind did not exist, probably
the earl would neither have much difficulty nor much scruple in
producing one that would pass muster. If the letters patent are a
forgery, I think it must have been manufactured about this time, and I
am not sure that we have far to seek for the forger. A charter by
William, Earl of Marr, confirming a grant by his grandfather, Morgund,
in 1267, is witnessed among others by ‘Magistro Ricardo Veyrement.’ This
Master Richard Veyrement was one of the canons of St. Andrews, and I
have shown in the introduction to Fordun’s Chronicle that he is probably
the author of a ‘Historia’ which existed in the Great Register of St.
Andrews, now lost; and the veritable Veremundus, from whom Hector Boece
says he derived a great part of his fabulous history. His connection
with William, Earl of Marr, at this very time, and his witnessing a
charter confirming a grant by that Morgund whose legitimacy was
challenged, certainly leads to the suspicion that the clever
manufacturer of these letters patent was no other than the arch-forger
of the spurious history of Scotland, and that if he had not been
unfortunate in the selection of his date, it might even now have escaped
detection.

The following is the text of the document:—

  Willielmus Rex Scotorum universis Episcopis Comitibus Abbatibus
  Prioribus Baronibus Militibus Thanis et Praepositis et omnibus aliis
  probis hominibus totius terrae suae tam clericis quam laicis salutem
  eternam in Domino: Sciatis presentes et futuri Morgundum filium
  Gillocheri quondam Comitis de Marre in mea præsentia venisse apud
  Hindhop Burnemuthe, in mea nova foresta decimo kalendarum Junij Anno
  Gratiæ MCLXXI. petendo jus suum de toto Comitatu de Marre, coram
  communi Consilio et exercitu Regni Scotiae ibidem congregato. Ego vero
  cupiens eidem Morgundo et omnibus aliis jura facere secundum
  petitionem suam jus suum inquisivi per multos viros fide dignos,
  videlicet per baronias et thanos Regni mei per quam inquisitionem
  inveni dictum Morgundum filium et haeredem legitimum dicti Gillocheri
  Comitis de Marre per quod concessi et reddidi eidem Morgundo totum
  Comitatum de Marre tanquam jus suum hæreditarium sicut praedictus
  Gillocherus pater suus obiit vestitus et saisitus; Tenendum et
  habendum eidem Morgundo et hæredibus suis de me et hæredibus meis in
  feodo et hæreditate cum omnibus pertinentis libertatibus et
  rectitudinibus suis adeo libere quiete plenarie et honorifice sicut
  aliquis Comes in Regno Scotiæ liberius quietius plenarius et
  honorificentius tenet vel possidet; Faciendo inde ipse et hæredes sui
  mihi et haeredibus meis forinsecum servicium videlicet Servicium
  Scoticanum sicut antecessores sui mihi et antecessoribus meis facere
  consueverunt. Eodem vero die et loco post homagium suum mihi factum
  coram communi Consilio Regni mei prædictus Morgundus petiit sibi jus
  fieri de toto Comitatu Moraviae de quo praedictus Gillocherus pater
  suus obiit vestitus et saisitus super qua petitione sua per quamplures
  viros fide dignos Barones Milites et Thanos Regni mei inquisitionem
  facere feci et per illam inquisitionem inveni dictum Morgundum verum
  et legitimum hæredem de comitatu Moraviæ et quod eodem tempore propter
  guerram inter me et Anglicos graviter fuissem occupatus et Moravienses
  pro voluntate mea non potuissem justificare dicto Morgundo nullum jus
  facere potui. Sed cum guerram inter me et adversarios meos complere et
  rebelles Moravienses superare potero et dicto Morgundo sibi et
  hæredibus suis promitto pro me et hæredibus meis fideliter et plenarie
  jus facere de toto comitatu Moraviæ. Et ut hoc factum meum aliis
  certificaretur prædicto Morgundo has literas meas dedi Patentis. Teste
  me ipso eodem anno die et loco supra dicto.


                                 NOTE.

-----

Footnote 529:

  This paper was read to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland on the
  8th of April 1878, and appears in their _Proceedings_ for that
  Session, p. 603. The photograph of the Letters Patent was deposited in
  their library.




                                   V.

                   ON THE EARLDOM OF CAITHNESS.[530]


The earldom of Caithness was possessed for many generations by the
Norwegian Earls of Orkney. They held the Islands of Orkney under the
King of Norway according to Norwegian custom, by which the title of Jarl
or Earl was a personal title. They held the earldom of Caithness under
the King of Scotland, and its tenure was in accordance with the laws of
Scotland.

We find from the Orkneyinga Saga that during this period the Orkney
Islands were frequently divided into two portions, and each half held by
different members of the Norwegian family, who each bore the title of
earl. We likewise find that the earldom of Caithness was at such times
also frequently divided, and each half held by different Earls of
Orkney, though whether both bore the title of Earl of Caithness does not
appear.

It is unnecessary for our purpose to go further back than the rule of
Thorfinn, Earl of Orkney, who died about A.D. 1056, and undoubtedly held
the whole of the Orkneys and the entire earldom of Caithness for a long
period.

He had two sons, Paul and Erlend, who after his death ruled jointly
without dividing the earldoms, and their descendants may be termed the
line of Paul and the line of Erlend.

After their death the islands were divided between Hakon, son of Paul,
and Magnus, son of Erlend, each bearing the title of earl. The latter
was the great earl known as St. Magnus. After his death, Earl Hakon
appears to have possessed the whole.

Earl Hakon had two sons, Harald Slettmali and Paul, who again divided
the islands, each having an earl’s title, but Earl Harald appears to
have held the whole of Caithness from the King of Scots. On his death
Earl Paul obtained possession of the whole.

In the meantime the line of Erlend failed in the male line, in the
person of Earl Magnus, but his sister Gunhild married a Norwegian called
Kol, and had by him a son Kali, who claimed a share of the islands, when
the King of Norway gave him the name of Rognwald, an earl’s title, and
divided the islands between him and Earl Paul.

Earl Paul’s sister Margaret had married Maddad, Earl of Atholl, and had
by him a son Harald, and, by a revolution which took place, Earl Paul
abdicated, and his nephew Harald was made earl in his place, and shared
the islands with Earl Rognwald. The latter then went on a pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, and in his absence Malcolm IV. made Erlend Ungi, son of
Harald Slettmali, Earl of Caithness, and gave him half of Caithness,
Earl Harald Maddadson having the other half.

Earl Rognwald then returns, and on Erlend’s death Orkney and Caithness
were shared between him and Earl Harald.

The line of Erlend again failed on the death of Earl Rognwald, who left
an only daughter Ingigerd, who married a Norwegian, Eirik Slagbrellir,
and had three sons, Harald Ungi, Magnus Mangi, and Rognwald, and three
daughters, Ingibiorg, Elin, and Ragnhild.

Earl Harald now possessed Orkney and Caithness, but soon after the King
of Norway gave Harald Ungi an earl’s title with the half of the Orkneys,
and by agreement with Earl Harald, King William the Lion gave Harald
Ungi the half of Caithness which had belonged to Earl Rognwald, but they
afterwards quarrelled, and Earl Harald Ungi was slain by the other Earl
Harald, who again possessed the whole.

Owing to the mutilation of the Bishop of Caithness by Earl Harald, he
was attacked by King William in 1201, and only allowed to retain
Caithness on payment of 2000 merks of silver, while the district of
Sutherland was taken from him and given to Hugo Freskin de Moravia.

Earl Harald died in 1206, and was succeeded by his son David, who died
in 1214, when his brother John became Earl of Orkney and Caithness.
Fordun tells us that King William made a treaty of peace with him in
that year, and took his daughter as a hostage, but the burning of Bishop
Adam in 1222 brought King Alexander II. down upon Earl John, who was
obliged to give up part of his lands into the hands of the king, which,
however, he redeemed the following year by paying a large sum of money,
and by his death in 1231 the line of Paul again came to an end.

In 1232, we find Magnus, son of Gillebride, Earl of Angus, called Earl
of Caithness, and the earldom remained in this family till between 1320
and 1329, when Magnus, Earl of Orkney and Caithness, died; but during
this time it is clear that these earls only possessed one half of
Caithness, and the other half appears in the possession of the De
Moravia family, for Freskin, Lord of Duffus, who married Johanna, who
possessed Strathnaver in her own right, and died before 1269, had two
daughters, Mary married to Sir Reginald Cheyne, and Christian married to
William de Fedrett, and each of these daughters had one-fourth part of
Caithness, for William De Fedrett resigns his fourth to Sir Reginald
Cheyne, who then appears in possession of one-half of Caithness (Chart.
of Moray, Robertson’s Index). These daughters probably inherited the
half of Caithness through their mother Johanna.

Gillebride having called one of his sons by the Norwegian name of
Magnus, indicates that he had a Norwegian mother. This is clear from his
also becoming Earl of Orkney, which the King of Scots could not have
given him. Gillebride died in 1200, so that Magnus must have been born
before that date, and about the time of Earl Harald Ungi, who had half
of Caithness, and died in 1198. Magnus is a name peculiar to this line,
as the great Earl Magnus belonged to it, and Harald Ungi had a brother
Magnus. The probability is that the half of Caithness which belonged to
the Angus family was that half usually possessed by the earls of the
line of Erlend, and was given by King Alexander with the title of Earl
to Magnus, as the son of one of Earl Harald Ungi’s sisters, while
Johanna, through whom the Moray family inherited the other half, was, as
indicated by her name, the daughter of John, Earl of Caithness of the
line of Paul, who had been kept by the king as a hostage, and given in
marriage to Freskin de Moravia.

Magnus, Earl of Orkney and Caithness, the last of the earls of the Angus
line, died before 1329, when ‘Caterina Comitissa Orcadiae et
Cathanesiae’ grants a charter ‘in viduitate.’ In 1330 we find a claim on
the earldom of Caithness by Simon Fraser and Margaret his spouse, one of
the heirs of the Earls of Caithness (Acta Parl. vi.). In 1331 we find
Malise, Earl of Stratherne, charged on the Chamberlain Rolls (p. 404)
with the rents of the fourth part of Caithness; and in 1334 Malise
appears as earl of the earldom of Stratherne, Caithness, and Orkney
(Chart. Inchaffray). It is clear, therefore, that the half of Caithness
which belonged to the Angus earls, had like the other half passed to two
co-heirs, and that the title of earl, with one-fourth of the earldom,
had gone to the Earl of Stratherne, and the other fourth to Margaret,
wife of Simon Fraser.[531]

There is some difficulty in clearing up the history of the last few
earls of Stratherne, and of discriminating between them, as they all
have the name of Malise. The first of the name of Malise was the son of
Robert, Earl of Stratherne, and Fordun (Bower) fixes the date of his
death when he says, in 1271, ‘Malisius comes de Stratherne in partibus
Gallicanis decessit et apud Dunblane sepelitur.’ In giving the death of
Magnus, king of Man, in 1269, he adds, ‘cujus relictam comes Malisius de
Stratherne _postea_ duxit videlicit filiam Eugenie de Ergadia;’ but the
_postea_ refers to after 1271, and this was the second Malise the son of
the former, for we find in 1291, Malise, Earl of Stratherne, does homage
to Edward I. at Stirling on 12th July, and twelve days after ‘Maria
Regina de Man et Comitissa de Stratherne’ does homage at Perth in
presence of Earl Malise. He died before 1296, as among the widows who
are secured in their possessions by the King of England in that year is
‘Maria quæ fuit uxor Malisii Comitis de Stratherne.’

In point of fact Malise (2d) must have died before February 1292, for in
that year ‘Maria Comitissa de Stratherne quæ fuit uxor Hugonis de
Abernethyn’ is summoned to Parliament to show cause why Alexander de
Abernethyn, son of Hugo, should not have his lands in Fyfe and Perth
(Act. Parl. vi.); and that she was not the same Maria as the Queen of
Man is clear from this, that she appears along with her in the list of
widows in 1296 as ‘Maria quæ fuit uxor Hugonis de Abernethyn.’ She must
therefore have been the wife of Malise (3d), son of Malise (2d).

This Malise (3d) is said in Wood’s ‘Peerage’ to have been killed at the
battle of Halidon Hill in 1333; but he died long before, for we find
that his second wife was Johanna de Menteith, whom he married in the
reign of Robert Bruce, as that king confirms a grant by Malise, Earl of
Stratherne, to Johanna, daughter of John Menteith, his spouse (Rob.
Index), and she after his death married John, Earl of Atholl, for there
is in Theiner a dispensation in 1339 for the marriage of Johanna,
Countess of Stratherne, widow of John, Earl of Atholl, to Maurice de
Moravia. Now this John, Earl of Atholl, was himself undoubtedly killed
at the battle of Halidon Hill in 1333. In point of fact Malise (3d) must
have died before 1320, for King Robert also grants a charter to Maria de
Stratherne, wife of Malise of Stratherne, of the lands of Kingkell,
Brechin, which were David de Brechin’s (Rob. Index). She must have been
therefore married to Malise (4th) during the lifetime of his father
Malise (3d), as he is not termed earl; but this Maria is undoubtedly the
Comitissa de Stratherne who was implicated along with David de Brechin
and William de Soulis in a conspiracy in 1320 (Fordun), and Malise (4th)
must then have been earl.

Malise (3d) had two daughters—Matilda, married to Robert de Tony, and
Maria to Sir John Murray of Drumsagard; for in 1293 we find him
contracting for the marriage of his daughter Matilda, then under 20, to
Robert de Tony (Hist. Doc. i. 394); and in the Chartulary of Inchaffray
are two charters by Malisius Comes de Stratherne to John de Moravia and
his heirs by Maria filia nostra; and his son Malise (4th) confirms a
grant soon after 1319 by Malisius ‘pater noster quondam comes de
Stratherne’ to John de Moravia et Maria filia Comitis.

In 1320, Malise, Earl of Stratherne, signs the letter to the Pope. This
must have been Malise (4th); and in 1334, in a charter in which he
styles himself earl of the earldoms of Stratherne, Caithness, and
Orkney, he grants to William, Earl of Ross, the marriage of his daughter
Isabel by Marjory his wife, declaring her his heir of the earldom of
Caithness failing an heir-male of the marriage of the said Earl Malise
and Marjory (Cart. Inch.) She must have been his second wife. It has
usually been assumed that Isabel married the Earl of Ross, but this is
impossible, for in another deed in 1350 the Earl of Ross styles Marjory,
Countess of Stratherne, his sister. He was therefore Isabel’s uncle, and
the deed was granted at the time of Earl Malise’s forfeiture, when
Isabel was probably still a child, and was intended if possible to
protect the succession.

Earl Malise (4th) had several other daughters. In 1353 Erngils, a
Norwegian, gets from the King of Norway the title of Earl of Orkney in
right of his mother Agneta, which he forfeits in 1357. In that year
Duncan son of Andrew protests for Alexander de le Arde in right of his
mother Matilda, called eldest daughter of Earl Malise. In 1364 Euphemia
de Stratherne appears as one of the heirs of the late Earl Malise. In
1374 Alexander de le Arde resigns his rights through his mother Matilda
to the King. In 1379 Henry St. Clair and Malise Sperre claim the Earldom
of Orkney. Henry becomes earl and calls his mother Isabella St. Clair in
a charter of lands of which she was heiress. Matilda was probably
daughter of Maria the first wife, and the little favour shown to her
rights may have arisen from her mother’s complicity in the conspiracy in
1320. The other daughters were probably children of Marjory, and the
Earl of Ross appears to have married his niece Isabella to Sir William
St. Clair, the father of Henry.

It is clear the right to Orkney and Caithness could not have come to the
Earls of Stratherne through the Queen of Man, wife of Malise (2d), nor
through either of the wives of Malise (4th), as his daughters by both
wives claimed. He must, therefore, have derived his right through his
mother, one of the wives of Malise (3d), but this could not have been
Johanna de Menteith, and therefore Maria, widow of Hugo de Abernethyn,
seems the only possible heiress of the earldom of Caithness.

                                 NOTES.

-----

Footnote 530:

  This paper was also read to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland on
  11th March 1878, and appears in their _Proceedings_ of that Session,
  p. 571.

Footnote 531:

  In 1375 Alexander de le Arde resigned to King Robert the Second the
  earldom of Caithness, the principal manor or mansion, with the title
  of Earl, and all other rights belonging to him in right of his mother
  Matilda, eldest daughter of Earl Malise; and King Robert granted to
  his son David the castle of Brathwell, its lands, and all other lands
  inherited by Alexander de le Arde in right of Matilda de Stratherne,
  his mother (Robertson’s _Index_, pp. 120, 129). The castle of
  Brathwell, now Braal Castle, is in the vale of the Thurso river, and
  the possession of the principal messuage carried the title of Earl.
  The other lands of the earldom appear to have been held in _pro
  indiviso_ fourths.




                                  VI.

                  ORIGINAL OF THE POEM ON THE LENNOX.


                       MUIREADHACH ALBANACH, C͞C.

                 Saer do lennan a Leamhain,
                     Alun og mac Muireadhaigh
                     A chul druimnech gan duibhe,
                     Ua Luighdech a liathmhuine.
                 Maith do chonach gilla ngeal,
                     O do charais do cheidfhear,
                     Mac righ bealaigh do bhi an dan,
                     [Gur] bhi Leamhain a leannan.
                 Gearr-abhand hainm eacht oile,
                     A reimheas na rioghroidhe,
                     Go riacht Corc Muimnech tar muir;
                     Folt druimnech os a dhearcuibh.
                 Da tainic Fearadhach fionn,
                     Mac righ Alban na noirphioll,
                     Da ndearna re Corc cleamhnas,
                     Ar thocht ina thighearnas.
                 Tug Fearadhach, feirrde leom,
                     A inghean do Corc chuil-fhionn,
                     Lan da tairm Teamhair Mide,
                     Leamhain ainm na hinghine.
                 Toircheas rioghna rug Leamhain,
                     Maine mac Chuirc chuil-leabhair,
                     Do thaisigh na hucht an ten,
                     Do Chore Chaisil na coilen.
                 Aen do laithibh do Leamhain,
                     Mathair Mhaine mheirleabhair,
                     Caega inghen fa ban bonn,
                     Ag snamh innbhir na habhonn.
                 Baidhter i an ucht an chalaidh,
                     Leamhain inghean Fhearadhaigh,
                     Baister Leamhain ort da eis,
                     Meabhair nach olc re a fhaisneis.
                 Dob annamh ceim catha gall,
                     Fa timlibh uaine a abhann,
                     Fa meince leat a Leamhain,
                     Mac eillte fa tinnbhearaibh.
                 Do fhas chughat Alun og,
                     Mac Muireadhaigh na min rod,
                     Aluinn snuadh a ghlac nglan-ur,
                     Slat do chuan an ched Alun.
                 Noch ar leathchumthach leanna,
                     Alun og ua hOilealla,
                     Bi an gheag do fhine Alun,
                     Cead ag ibhe in aen ghalun.
                 Gen co beith acht aen tunna dfhion,
                     Ag fine Chuirc na caeimhriog,
                     Ni sochma siol ceann-glan Chuirc,
                     Da ndearna fion do anairt.
                 Mormhaer Leamhna leaca mhin,
                     Deagh-mhac inghine Ailin,
                     A gheal-lamh, a thaebh, a throigh,
                     Saer do leannan a Leamhain.
                                               Saer.




                                  VII.

COMPARISON between the HIGHLAND CLANS and the AFGHAUN TRIBES. Written in
                       1816 by Sir Walter Scott.


The genealogies of the Afghaun tribes may be paralleled with those of
the Clans; the nature of their favourite sports, their love of their
native land, their hospitality, their address, their simplicity of
manners, exactly correspond. Their superstitions are the same, or nearly
so. The _Gholée Beabaun_ (demons of the desert) resemble the _Boddach_
of the Highlanders, who ‘walked the heath at midnight and at noon.’ The
Afghaun’s most ordinary mode of divination is by examining the marks in
the blade-bone of a sheep, held up to the light; and even so, the Rev.
Mr. Robert Kirk assures us, that in his time, the end of the sixteenth
century, ‘the seers prognosticate many future events (only for a month’s
space) from the shoulder-bone of a sheep on which a knife never came. By
looking into the bone, they will tell if whoredom be committed in the
owner’s house; what money the master of the sheep had; if any will die
out of that house for a month; and if any cattle there will take a
_trake_ (_i.e_. a disease), as if planet-struck.’[532]

The Afghaun, who, in his weary travels, had seen no vale equal to his
own native valley of Speiger, may find a parallel in many an exile from
the braes of Lochaber; and whoever had remonstrated with an ancient
Highland chief on the superior advantages of a civilised life, regulated
by the authority of equal laws, would have received an answer something
similar to the indignant reply of the old Afghaun: ‘We are content with
discord, we are content with alarms, we are content with blood, but we
will never be content with a master.’[533] The Highland chiefs,
otherwise very frequently men of sense and education, and only
distinguished in Lowland society by an affectation of rank and
stateliness somewhat above their means, were, in their own country, from
the absolute submission paid to them by their clans, and the want of
frequent intercourse with persons of the same rank with themselves,
nursed in a high and daring spirit of independent sovereignty which
would not brook or receive protection or control from the public law or
government, and disdained to owe their possessions and the preservation
of their rights to anything but their own broadswords.

Similar examples may be derived from the History of Persia by Sir John
Malcolm. But our limits do not permit us further to pursue a parallel
which serves strikingly to show how the same state of society and
civilisation produces similar manners, laws, and customs, even at the
most remote period of time, and in the most distant quarters of the
world. In two respects the manners of the Caubul tribes differ
materially from those of the Highlanders; first, in the influence of
their Jeergas, or patriarchal senates, which diminishes the power of
their chiefs, and gives a democratic turn to each separate tribe. This
appears to have been a perpetual and radical difference; for at no time
do the Highland chiefs appear to have taken counsel with their elders,
as an authorised and independent body, although, no doubt, they availed
themselves of their advice and experience upon the principle of a
general who summons a council of war. The second point of distinction
respects the consolidation of those detached tribes under one head, or
king, who, with a degree of authority greater or less according to his
talents, popularity, and other circumstances, is the acknowledged head
of the associated communities. In this point, however, the Highlanders
anciently resembled the Afghauns, as will appear when we give a brief
sketch of their general history. But this, to be intelligible, must be
preceded by some account of their social system, of which the original
and primitive basis differed very little from the first time that we
hear of them in history until the destruction of clanship in
1748.—Review of Culloden Papers, _Quarterly Review_, vol. xiv. p. 289.




                                 VIII.

                LEGENDARY DESCENT OF THE HIGHLAND CLANS,
                        ACCORDING TO IRISH MSS.


                                   I.

 CLANS supposed to be descended from FERGUS LEITH DERG, son of Nemedh,
                who led the Nemedian colony to Ireland.

                                   I.

 GENELACH CLANN CAILIN ANNSO[534]    GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN COLIN OR
                                       CAMBELLS, NOW CAMPBELLS.
 Cailin oig mac                      Sir Colin Cambell of Lochaw (chr.
                                       in 1407) son of
 Gillaeaspic ruaidh mic              Sir Archibald Cambell (has a chr.
                                       in 1368 of lands as freely as his
                                       progenitor Duncan Mac Duine) son
                                       of
 Cailin mic                          Sir Colin Cambell of Lochow son of
 Neill mic                           Sir Neill Cambell of Lochaw son of
 Cailin moir mic                     Sir Colin Mor Cambell of Lochaw son
                                       of
 Gilleeaspic mic                     Gillespic Cambell (1266, Exch.
                                       Rolls) son of
 Dubgaill Cambel a quo mic           Dugald Cambel, from whom came the
                                       name of Cambell, son of
 Donnchach mic                       Duncan son of
 Gillaeaspic mic                     Gillespic son of
 Gillacolaim renabarta mic Duibne    Malcolm, called Mac Duine, son of
   mic
 Duibne[535] on raithir mic          Duibhne, from whom the name is
                                       taken, _son of_
 Eiranaid or Fearadoig mic           _Fearadoig son of_
 Smeirbi mic                         _Smeroie son of_
 Artuir mic                          _Arthur son of_
 Uibher .i. rig andomain[536] mic    _Uibher, king of the world (Uther
                                       Pendragon), son of_
 Ambrois mic                         _Ambrosius son of_
 Considin mic                        _Constantine son of_
 Amgcel mic                          _Amgcel son of_
 Toisid mic                          _Toisid son of_
 Conruirg mic                        _Conruirg son of_
 Considin mic                        _Constantine son of_
 Artuir na laimh mic                 _Arthur of the hand, son of_
 Laimlin mic                         _Laimlin son of_
 Artuir laimberg mic                 _Arthur Redhand son of_
 Bene Briot mic                      _Bene Briot son of_
 Artuir mic                          _Arthur son of_
 Allardoid mic                       _Allardoid son of_
 Artuir Fad Eaglais mic              _Arthur of the long church, son of_
 Lamdoid mic                         _Lamdoid son of_
 Findluga mic                        _Findlay son of_
 Artuir oig mic                      _Arthur the young, son of_
 Firmara mic                         _Firmara or the man of the sea, son
                                       of_
 Artuir moir mic                     _Arthur the great, son of_
 Bene Briot mic                      _Bene Briot son of_
 Briotus mic                         _Briotus son of_
 Briotan o bfuilid Breatnan mic      _Briotan, from whom came the
                                       Britons, son of_
 Fergusa Leithderg mic               _Fergus Redside, son of_
 Nemed                               _Nemedius_.

-----

Footnote 532:

  _Essay on the Nature and Actions of the Subterranean Invisible People
  going under the name of Elves, Fairies, and the like._ London, 1815.

Footnote 533:

  _Account of Caubul_, p. 174 note.

Footnote 534:

  From the MS. 1467, Kilbride MS., c. 1540, and MacFirbis’s Gen. MS.

Footnote 535:

  The later spurious pedigrees made this Duibhne, son of Diarmaid
  McDuimhn, by Graine his wife, from whom the Campbells were called Siol
  Diarmaid, _i.e_. Diarmed’s seed, and place between him and Earanaid
  seven imaginary Duimhns, Arthurs, and Fearathors (Campbell’s _West
  Highland Tales_, iii. p. 89), thus importing the Ossianic hero Diarmed
  o Duine into the pedigree from mere similarity of name. There is no
  reason to suppose that the clan were ever really called Siol Diarmed.

Footnote 536:

  MS. 1467 stops here, but elsewhere says the Cambells and Macleods were
  descended from Nemedius. The earlier part is taken from two other MSS.
  MacFirbis gives a different list of names, eleven in number, but
  likewise terminating with Briotan, son of Fergus Lethderg. They are
  ‘Iobar or Uther Mac Lidir mic Brearnaird mic Muiris mic Magoth mic
  Coiel mic Catogain mic Caidimoir mic Catogain mic Bende mic Mebrec mic
  Grifin mic Briotain, o taid Bretnaig, mic Fergusa Leithderg mic
  Nemid,’ etc.

                                  II.

 GENELACH MIC LEOD ANNSO[537]        GENEALOGY OF MACLEOD here.
 (Alasdran) mic                      Alexander Macleod son of[538]
 (        ) mic                      William Macleod son of
 (        ) mic                      John Macleod son of
 (        ) mic                      William Macleod son of
 (Giollacolum) mic                   Malcolm Macleod son of
 (Tarmoid) mic                       Tormode Macleod son of[539]
 Leod on raithir mic                 Leod, from whom the clan is named,
                                       _son of_
 Oloig mic                           _Oil the young, son of_
 Oib mic                             _Oib son of_
 Oilmoir mic                         _Oib the great, son of_
 Iamhar oig mic                      _Ivor the young, son of_
 Sin Iamhar mic                      _Old Ivor son of_
 Sgoinne Sgandlan mic                _Sgandlan of Scone, son of_
 Iamhar Athacliath mic               _Ivor of Dublin, son of_
 Connla mic                          _Connal son of_
 Connaill cl. derg mic               _Connall of the red sword, son of_
 Ceallach mic                        _Ceallach son of_
 Mardoid mic                         _Mardoid son of_
 Ceallach Catluanid mic              _Ceallach Catluanid son of_
 Cuilinnan mic                       _Cuilinnan son of_
 Connla mic                          _Connal son of_
 Dergdian Sgotheg mic                _Dergdian Sgotheg, son of_
 Manuis oig mic                      _Manus the young, son of_
 Magnus na luingi luaithe mic        _Magnus of the swift ship, son of_
 Magnus Aircin mic                   _Magnus of Orkney, son of_
 Iamhar uallach mic                  _Ivor the skilful, son of_
 Dergi mic                           _Dergi son of_
 Arailt mic                          _Harald son of_
 Iamhar nam Breat mic                _Ivor of the judgments, son of_
 Ubhaidh mic                         _Ubhaidh son of_
 Arailt mic                          _Harald son of_
 Aspuig mic                          _Aspac son of_
 Ceallach mic                        _Ceallach son of_
 Connla mic                          _Connal son of_
 Lamus mic                           _Lamus son of_
 Lungbard mic                        _Longobard son of_
 Lamus mic                           _Lamus son of_
 Lochlan mic                         _Lochlan son of_
 Arailt mic                          _Harald son of_
 Laigh laidere o.r. clann Laigh mic  _Laigh the strong, from whom called
                                       Clan Laigh, son of_
 Fergus Leighderg                    _Fergus of the red side_.

-----

Footnote 537:

  From the Kilbride MS., c. 1540. The first six names have been
  carefully erased, probably by a partisan of the rival house. They are
  supplied from other sources.

Footnote 538:

  Alexander Macleod has charters as son and heir of the deceased William
  John Maclodeson of Dunvegan, on the forfeiture of the Lord of the
  Isles in 1498.—_Reg. Mag. Sig._

Footnote 539:

  There is a charter by David II. to Malcolm, son of Tormode Macloyde,
  of two parts of Glenelg.—R. I.

                                  III.

 GENELACH MIC NICAIL                 GENEALOGY OF THE NICOLSONS.[540]
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Eogain mic                          Ewen son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Nicail mic                          Nicail son of
 Aigi mic                            Aigi son of
 Neailb mic                          Neailb son of
 Nicail mic                          Nicail son of
 Gregill mic                         Gregill[541] son of
 Gillemure mic                       Gillemure _son of_
 Sealbar mic                         _Sealbar son of_
 Toircinn mic                        _Toircinn son of_
 Tottha mic                          _Tottha son of_
 Trostain mic                        _Trostain son of_
 Sdacaill mic                        _Sdacaill son of_
 Erble o fuiled ic Erble mic         _Erble, from whom Mac Erble, son
                                       of_
 Arailt mic                          _Harald son of_
 Murechaich mic                      _Murechach son of_
 Fogacail mic                        _Fogacail son of_
 Poil mic                            _Paul son of_
 Ailin mic                           _Allan son of_
 Airfin mic                          _Airfin son of_
 Taidg mic                           _Teague son of_
 Amlaim mic                          _Amlaimh son of_
 Turcinn Atacliath mic               _Turcinn of Dublin, son of_
 Arailt mic                          _Harald son of_
 Asmainn mic                         _Asmainn son of_
 Airdil                              _Airdil_.

-----

Footnote 540:

  This genealogy is added from MS. 1467, as it contains a jumble of
  Gaelic and Norwegian names somewhat similar to that of the Macleods.
  It will be observed that the Pictish name Trostain or Drostain occurs
  among them.

                                  II.

    Clans supposed to be descended from COLLA UAIS, son of Eochaidh
                       Doimlein, King of Ireland.

                                   I.

NA TRI COLLA.[542]

A deir an croinicil go ttugadar na tri Colla seacht ccatha re seacht
laithe a ndiaigh a cheile dultachaibh agus gur marbadh ri uladh san
chath deigheanach didh .i. Fergus fogha .i. i cath achaidh deirg. Don
taobh a bhus do ghlionn Righe do rinneadh torann gleanna righe on iobur
anuas eatarra agus Clanna Rughraidhe, agus nir fhilleadar Clanna
Rughraidhe anun o sin ale. Do chuir Ri eireann .i. Muireadhach Tireach
gairm ar chlainn Eachach Duiblen .i. na tri Colla agus tugadh go
teamraigh iad agus tug saorrse agus sochra dhoibh fein agus da
noighrighibh na ndiaigh go siordhaighe agus do mhaith marbhadh a athar
doibh ar a ccongnamh do beith leis o sin amach agus tug a noireadsa do
dhutbaigh doibh as cionn a ngabaltais a nultaibh .i. Triocha ced in gach
cuigeadh eile deirinn agus baile in gach Triocha ced agus teach agus
garrdha in gach baile. Ag so an chuid eile dona sochraibh .i.
coimheirghe rompa ar fhearuibh eirionn a naonach agus a noireachtus acht
Ri eireann amhain agus gan iadsan deirghe re cach. Trian eadala a
ccuantaibh long doibh. Tus dighe tus leapta agus ionnalta re mileadhaibh
eireann i ttighibh miodhcurta aca. Coinnmeadh da ndaoinibh ar fhearaibh
eireann an feadh beidis gan buanacht dfhaghail. Gan eiric fola do dhul
uatha. Coimhed ghiall eireann aca. Giodh be do rachadh ar a nionchuibh
comairce go ceann mbliadhna aige. Gach arm nochtar a naonach no a
noireachtus do beith aca. Ni raibe ag righ eireann acht braighde ar
braighdibh uatha. Leathghuala Righ eireann ag righ sleachta na ccolla
agus fad a laimhe agus a lainne dfholmhughadh eder e agus cach.
Coinnmeadh eachra agus chon o shamuin go bealtuine ar feadh eirenn aca.
Da mbuantaoi creach na ndiaigh dhiobh agus siad ar sluaigheadh righ
eireann se ba san bhoin doibh uadha. Bo ar fich agus tuarasdul do gach
aoin da maithibh o righ eireann ar sluaigheadh. Triocha colg ded.
Triocha balt airgid. Triocha sleagh. Triocha brat o righ eireann do righ
sleachta na ccolla iar bhfhilleadh da sluaigheadh agus da mbeidis geill
uatha ag righ eireann ni bhiodh do chuibhreach ortha acht slabrad oir.
No a mbeith fa reir a ccuideachtain righ eireann. Oir as uime a dearar
oirgiallaibh riu .i. or as glais da ngiallaibh. Ag sin a sochair maille
re sochraibh eile nach airmtear annso. A siad na ceithre haibhne as
uaisle a nultaibh toranna fearainn chloinne na ccolla .i. Boinn, Banna,
an Eirne agus an Fhionn. Iomthusa Cholla Uais nior bhfhiu leis fuireach
ar a chuid don duthuigh no do na sochraibh sin a dubramar o do bi ere
agus an rioghacht aige fein roime sin. Ragbhais a fhearann agus na
sochair sin aga braithribh. Dala Colla Uais anais a mbun a gabaltais
fein a nalbain agus a bhfhionnlochlannuibh o shoïn ale agus a
ngablaigheann uadha acht ar fhill go heirinn diobh a mbun a nduthchasa.
Ase so craobhsgaoileadh shleachta righ eireann .i. Colla Uais .i. Clann
Domnaill a neirinn agus a nalbain agus a ngablaigeann uatha. Mar a taid
Clann Raghnaill a tuaigh agus Clann Eoin Airnamurchann agus
Macdubhghuill lathairn agus Clann Alasdair a neirinn agus a nalban agus
Clann tsithigh na Munchan agus moran do maithibh oile nach airemtear
sonn.

OF THE THREE COLLAS. The chronicle says that the three Collas fought
seven battles during seven days, one after another, to the Ulidians, and
that the king of Ulad, _i.e_. Fergus Fogha, was slain in the last battle
of them, viz. the battle of Achadh-derg. On this side of Glen-Righe the
boundary of Glen-Righe from the Ibar down (from Newry northwards) was
made between them and the Clan Rughraidhe, and the Clan Rughraidhe did
not return across from that to this. The king of Erin, viz. Muredach
Tireach, invited the sons of Eochaidh Duiblen, viz. the three Collas;
and they were brought to Tara; and he gave freedom and emoluments to
themselves and their heirs after them for ever. And he forgave them the
killing on condition that they would aid him from henceforth. And he
gave them this much of possessions beyond their acquisitions in Ulad,
viz. a Triocha ced in every other province of Erin, and a bally in every
Triocha ced, and a house and garden in every bally. This is another part
of the privileges, viz., that the men of Erin, excepting the king alone,
should rise up before them in fair and assembly, and that they should
rise up before none. They should have a third of the profits of
ship-harbours; precedence of drink, bed, and ablutions before the
knights of Erin, in banquet-halls. Coigny for their people whilst they
might be without getting Bonaght. That they should not lose blood-eric;
should have the guarding of the hostages of Erin; that whoever sought
their guarantee should have protection for a year; that they should have
every weapon unsheathed in fair or assembly. The king of Erin had from
them only pledge for pledge. The king of the race of the Collas should
have the half-shoulder of the king of Erin (the right to sit or stand
beside him), and the length of his hand and spear should be vacant
between him and all others. They should have maintenance for horse and
hound throughout Erin from Allhallowtide to May. If a prey were taken
from them in their rear, when on the hosting of the king of Erin, they
should have six cows from him for every cow. The pay of each of their
goodmen from the king of Erin, on a hosting, was 21 cows. The king of
the race of the Collas should get from the king of Erin, after returning
from his hosting, 30 swords, 30 silver belts, 30 spears, 30 garments,
and if the king of Erin had any hostages from them, there was no manacle
on them save a gold chain, or they would be under control in the suite
of the king of Erin; for the reason they are called Oirgialla is that
gold (_or_) is the lock (_glas_) for their hostages (_gialla_). These
are their privileges, together with other privileges not enumerated
here. The four noblest rivers in Ulad are the boundaries of the lands of
the Clan Colla, viz. the Boyne, the Bann, the Erne, and the Finn. As
regards Colla Uais, he did not think it worth while remaining with his
share of the country, or of those privileges we have mentioned, for he
himself had Erin and the kingship ere then. He left the land and those
privileges to his brothers. With regard (further) to Colla Uais, he
remained in the foundation of his own acquisitions in Alban and
Finnlochlann (Innsigall) from that time to this, and all who descend
from him, except those that returned to Erin or the foundation of their
inheritance. These are the branches of the race of the king of Erin,
viz. Colla Uais, viz. the Clan Donald of Erin and Alban, and those who
descend from them, as are the Clan Ranald of the north, the Clan Ian
Ardnamurchan and MacDougall of Lorn, and the Clan Alaster of Erin and
Alban, and the Clan Sheehy of Munster, and many other good men not
enumerated here.

                                  II.

 GENEALACH MIC DOMHNALL NA           GENEALOGY OF THE MACDONALDS OF
   HALBAN[543]                         ALBAN.
 Eoin mac                            John (_Lord of the Isles, died
                                       1380_) son of
 Aengusa oig mic                     Angus og (_Lord of the Isles_) son
                                       of
 Aengusa moir mic                    Angus mor (_Lord of the Isles_) son
                                       of
 Domhnall mic                        Donald (_Lord of the Isles_) son of
 Raghnaill mic                       Reginald, King of the Isles, son of
 Somairli mic                        Somerled (_Kinglet of Argyll_) son
                                       of
 Gillebrigde mic                     Gillebride son of
 Gilleadamnain mic                   Gilladomnan son of
 Solaimh mic                         Solomon son of
 Imergi[544] mic                     Jehmarc (_did homage to Canute
                                       1029_) _son of_
 Suibhne mic                         _Suibhne son of_
 Niallgusa mic                       _Niallgusa son of_
 Amaini mic                          _Maine son of_
 Gofraidh mic                        _Godfrey son of_
 Fergusa mic                         _Fergus son of_
 Eirc mic                            _Erc son of_
 Echach mic                          _Echach son of_
 Colla Uais                          _Colla Uais_.

-----

Footnote 541:

  The author of the Statistical Account of Edderachylis (_Stat. Acct._,
  vi. p. 278) mentions that the Nicolsons are traditionally descended
  from a certain Krycul, who must have lived in the thirteenth century,
  and so far the pedigree may be genuine.

Footnote 542:

  From MS. T.C.D., H. 3, 18. The author is indebted to Mr. Hennessy for
  the translation of this tract.

Footnote 543:

  Taken from the Books of Ballimote and Leccan.

                                  III.

 CRAEBSGAIELED CLANN DOMNALL ANSO    THE BRANCHES OF THE CLAN-DONALD
   .i. Clann Eoin a hile[545] Eoin     here, viz. the children of John,
   agus Ragnall agus Gofraig tri mic   Lord of the Isles, John and
   E. mhic Ruaidri; Domnall og agus    Reginald and Godfrey, the three
   Eoin agus Aengus agus Alexandair    sons of Amie mac Rory; Donald og
   IIII. mhic inghen Galtin .i. rig    and John and Angus and Alexander,
   Alban.                              four sons of the daughter of
                                       Galtur (Robert), king of Alban.
 Ag Eoin a hile condregaid Clann     The Clan Donald, Clan Ranald, and
   Domnall agus Clann Ragnall agus     Clan Godfrey meet at John Lord of
   Clann Gofruig.                      the Isles.
 Clann Ragnall Ailin agus Eoin dobi  The children of Reginald were Allan
   dall fadeoig agus Domnall agus      and John, who was blind from
   Aengusa Riabhach agus Dubgaill      youth, and Donald and Angus
   agus ag so clann a sin .i. Clann    Riabhach and Dugald; and these
   Ailin Ruaidri agus Uisdinn agus     are the children of Allan, viz.
   Eoin.                               Roderic and Huistein and John.
 Clann Domnall mhic Ragnall Eoin dar The children of Donald son of
   mathair Laiglib inghen Cimair       Reginald were John, whose mother
   agus Alexandair na caillie agus     was Laiglib daughter of Cimair,
   Aengus oig Clann inghean mhic       and Alexander of the woods, and
   Cimisin.                            Angus og, children of the
                                       daughter of Macimie.
 Eoin dall acu mac les .i. Eoin.     Blind John had but one son, viz.
                                       John.
 Aengus Riabhach aen mac mait aige   Angus Riach had one good son, viz.
   .i. Aengus oig aig airobusa fein    Angus og, and had in him a
   amaelanac oig.                      bald-headed youth.
 Clann Dubgaill mhic Ragnall         The children of Dugald son of
       agus Aengus Ruadh. Clann        Reginald are ... and Aengus the
   Gofruig Aengus agus Eoin agus       red. The children of Godfrey were
   Somairli agus Ragnall.              Angus and John and Somerled and
                                       Reginald.
 Aengus trath nir fagail clann mae   Angus dying early did not leave any
   agb ata sil.                        male children who had offspring.

-----

Footnote 544:

  MacFirbis gives this name as Meargaidhe, and adds _a quo_. He terms
  the clan Ua Meargaidhe, meaning that this name was derived from this
  Meargaidhe. The name is unknown in Scotland.

Footnote 545:

  Taken from MS. 1467.

                                  IV.

                                     THE CLAN ALASTAIR.[546]
 Marcus mac                          Marcus son of
 Somairlig mic                       Somerled son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Aengusa mor                         Angus mor, Lord of the Isles.
 Eoin mac                            John son of
 Raghnaill[547] mic                  Reginald son of
 Alexandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Aengusa moir                        Angus mor.
 Aengus og mac                       Angus og son of
 Aengusa mic                         Angus son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Aengusa moir                        Angus moir.
 Eoin mac                            John son of
 Somairli mic                        Somerled son of
 Eoindub mic                         Black John son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Angus mor                           Angus mor (_Lord of the Isles_).
 Godfrey mac                         Godfrey son of
 Angus mhic                          Angus son of
 Alexander oig                       Alexander oig.
 Angus odhar mac                     Angus the pale son of
 Toirdealbach mhic                   Tearlach son of
 Alexander oig                       Alexander oig.
 Somairli mac                        Somerled son of
 Gillabrigdi mic                     Gillebride son of
 Gofraig mic                         Godfrey son of
 Alexandair oig                      Alexander oig.

-----

Footnote 546:

  The following branches, descended from Alaxandair, son of Angus mor,
  are taken from the Books of Ballimote and Leccan and MS. 1467, and,
  though bearing no title, are obviously the Clan Alasdair.

Footnote 547:

  Raghnall mac Alaxandair, heir of the Clann Alaxandair, is mentioned in
  the Annals of Ulster in 1363.

                                   V.

                                     THE CLAN IAN OF ARDNAMURCHAN.[548]
 Domnall mac                         Donald son of
 Aengus mic                          Angus son of
 Eoin sprangaig mic                  John the bold son of
 Aengusa mor                         Angus mor (_Lord of the Isles_).


                                  VI.

 Domnall mac[549]                    Donald son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Domnaill mic                        Donald (_Lord of the Isles_) son of
 Raghnaill mic                       Reginald (_Lord of the Isles_) son
                                       of
 Somairli                            Somerled.
 Dondchad agus Eachond da mhic       Duncan and Eocha two sons of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Domnall mic                         Donald son of
 Raghnaill                           Reginald.
 Eoin agus Gillaespic da mhic        John and Gillespie two sons of
 Donnchaid mic                       Duncan son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Domnaill mic                        Donald son of
 Raghnaill                           Reginald.
 Toirdealbach agus Lochlan da mhic   Tearlach and Lochlan two sons of
 Eachduind mic                       Eocha son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Domnaill mic                        Donald son of
 Raghnaill                           Reginald.


                                  VII.

 GENEALACH MAC DUBHGAILL[550]        GENEALOGY OF MACDOUGALL.
 Eoin mac                            John son of
 Ailin mic                           Alan son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of[551]
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Eogan moir mic                      Ewen mor son of
 Donchadh mic                        Duncan son of
 Dubhgaill mic[552]                  Dougall son of
 Raghnaill                           Reginald
 gu concraigid na tri cineduigh .i.  where the three tribes of the Clan
   Clann Domnaill agus Clan Dubgaill   Donald, Clan Dubgall, and MacRory
   agus MacRuaidri                     converge.
 Eoin mac[553]                       John son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Alaxandair                          Alexander.
 Alaxandair og mac                   Alexander og son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Alaxandair                          Alexander.
 Eoin agus Somairli agus Ailin agus  John and Somerled and Allan and
   Alaxandair og Ceithri mhic Eoin     Alexander og were the four sons
   mic                                 of John son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Donnchaidh                          Duncan.

-----

Footnote 548:

  This pedigree, taken from Book of Leccan and MS. 1467, though without
  a title, is evidently that of the Clan Ian Ardnamurchan.

Footnote 549:

  The following descendants of Alexander, son of Donald, Lord of the
  Isles, from Book of Leccan and MS. 1467.

Footnote 550:

  From Book of Ballimote and MS. 1467. It also occurs in Book of Leccan
  under the name of ‘Clann Somairli.’

Footnote 551:

  Appears in 1491 as Dominus Johannes de Ergadia filius nobilis viri
  Domini Alexandri de Ergadia.

Footnote 552:

  Dubgall is erroneously made son of Reginald. In Book of Leccan he is
  correctly made son of Somerled.

Footnote 553:

  From the Book of Leccan.


                                 VIII.

 CLANN EOIN BOGAIG[554]              CLAN OF JOHN THE LAME.
 Eoin mac                            John son of
 Lochland mic                        Lochlan son of
 Somairli mic                        Somerland son of
 Donnchadh mic                       Duncan son of
 Dubhgail                            Dougall.
 Dondchad mac                        Duncan son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Alexander son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Donchaid                            Duncan.
 Malcolaim mac                       Malcolm son of
 Lochland mic                        Lochlan son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Donchad                             Duncan.
 Fearchar agus Lochland agus Imar    Ferchard and Lochlan and Ivor three
   tri mhic                            sons of
 Gillacolum mic                      Malcom son of
 Imair mic                           Ivor son of
 Dubhgaill mic                       Douugall son of
 Lochland mic                        Lochlan son of
 Donchad mic                         Duncan son of
 Dubgaill                            Dougall.
 Alaxandair agus Somairli da mhic    Alexander and Somerled two sons of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Alaxandair mic                      Aalexander son of
 Donnchaidh mic                      Duncan son of
 Dubhgaill                           Dougall.


                                  IX.

 GENEALACH MHIC RUAIDRI[555]         GENEALOGY OF MACRORY.
 Tomas mac                           Thomas son of
 Ragnall finn mic                    Ranald the white, son of
 Lochloind mic                       Lochlan son of
 Ailin mic                           Allan son of
 Ruaidri mic                         Roderic or Rory son of
 Ragnaill                            Reginald (_Lord of the Isles_).
 Ragnall finn eile mac[556]          Another Ranald the white, son of
 Ruaidri mic                         Roderic son of
 Ailin mic                           Allan son of
 Ruaidri mic                         Roderic son of
 Ragnaill                            Reginald (_Lord of the Isles_).
 Fearchar agus Donnchad da mhic[557] Ferchard and Duncan two sons of
 Dondchaid mic                       Duncan son of
 Dubgaill mic                        Dougall son of
 Ruaidri mic                         Roderic son of
 Raghnaill                           Reginald (_Lord of the Isles_).
 Do Raghnall sin Comraig Clann       At this Reginald meet the Clan
   Domnall agus Clann Ruaidri[558]     Donald and Clan Rory, for Roderic
   .i. Ruaddri agus Domnall da mhic    and Donald were the two sons of
   Raghnall. Dearbrathair do           Reginald. His brother-german was
   Raghnall sin Dubgall a quo Clann    Dougall, from whom were descended
   Dubgaill                            the Clan Dougall.

-----

Footnote 554:

  From Book of Leccan and MS. 1467.

Footnote 555:

  From Books of Ballimote and Leccan and MS. 1467.

Footnote 556:

  From Book of Leccan and MS. 1467. Reginald filius Roderici has a
  charter of Garmoran and other lands from David II., and his father
  Roderic filius Alani of the same lands from Robert Bruce.

Footnote 557:

  From Book of Leccan.

Footnote 558:

  MS. 1467 has erroneously Condrecaidh Clann Ruaidri agus Clann Domnall
  agus Clann Dubgaill—converged the Clan Rory, Clan Donald, and Clan
  Dougall.


                                  III.

 Clans supposed to be descended from the HY NEILL or race of Niall Naoi
Giallach, king of Ireland, through Niall Glundubh, head of the northern
                Hy Neill and king of Ireland, slain 917.


                                   I.

 GENELACH CLANN LADMANN[559]         GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN LADMANN OR
                                       LAMONTS.
 Roibert mac                         Robert son of
 Donchadh mic                        Duncan son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Giollacoluim mic                    Malcolm son of
 Ladmainn mic                        Ladmann son of
 Giollacoluim mic                    Malcolm son of
 Fearchair mic                       Ferchard son of
 Duinsleibe mic                      Duinsleibhe _son of_
 Aeda Alain .i. Buirche mic          _Aeda Alain the Buirche, son of_
 Anradan mic                         _Anradan son of_
 Flaithbertaig mic                   _Flaherty son of_
 Murcertach mic                      _Murcertach son of_
 Domnall mic                         _Donald son of_
 Murcertach mic                      _Murcertach son of_
 Neill Glundub                       _Niall Glundubh (or Black Knee)_.

-----

Footnote 559:

  This and the three following are from the MS. 1467 and MacFirbis.


                                  II.

 DOGENELACH MHIC LACHLAN OG          GENEALOGY OF MACLACHLAN.
 Caineach mac                        Kenneth son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Lachlan mic                         Lachlan son of
 Gillapadruig mic                    Gillapadrig son of
 Lachlan moir mic                    Lachlan Mor son of
 Gillapadruig mic                    Gillapadrig son of
 Gillacrist mic                      Gillacrist _son of_
 Aeda Alain                          _Aeda Alain_
 renabarta Buirche mic               _called Buirche son of_
 Anradan condregaided                _Anradan, where it converges with_
 Clanna Neill Nai Giallach           _the Clan Niall Naoi Giallach_.
 Caitrina ingen                      Catherine the daughter of
 Donchadh mic                        Duncan son of
 Ladmann mathair                     Ladmann was mother of
 Cainig agus Padraig agus Gillaespic Kenneth, Patrick, and Gillespie,
   agus                                and Agnes the daughter
 Agais ingen                         of Macdonald was the
 mic Domnaill mathair                mother of
 Eoin agus                           John and
 Ealusaid ingen                      Elizabeth daughter of
 Mormair Comgaill mathair            the Lord of Cowall was
 Lachlain oig agus                   mother of Lachlan og and
 mathair Gillapadruig ingen          the mother of Gillapadrig
 Domnall mic                         was the daughter of Donald
 Eiri mic                            son of Eric mac Kennedy Lord
 Ceinnedon tigerna Cairge agus       of Carrick and the daughter of
 ingen Lachlan mic                   Lachlan mac Rory was the
 Ruaidri mathair                     mother of Gillapadric, viz.
 Gillapadruig .i. Ateg no M.         Ateg or M.


                                  III.

 GENELACH CLANN SOMAIRLE             GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN SORLEY.
 Domnall mac                         Donald son of
 Gillaespic mic                      Gillespic son of
 Aengusa mic                         Angus son of
 Domnaill mic                        Donald son of
 Somairle mic                        Somerled son of
 Ferchair mic                        Ferchard son of
 Duinsleibe son of Buirche           Dunslebhe _son of Burche_.


                                  IV.

 GENELACH MHIC EOGAIN NA HOITREAC    GENEALOGY OF MACEWEN OF OTTER HERE.
   ANNSO
 Baltuir mac                         Walter son of
 Eoin mic                            John son of
 Eogain mic                          Ewen son of
 Gillaespic mic                      Gillespic son of
            mic                                son of
            mic                                son of
 Saibairan mic                       Saveran son of
 Duinsleibe mic                      Dunslebhe _son of_
 Aeda Alain renabarta                _Aeda Alain called_
 Buirche mic                         _Buirche son of_
 Anradan mic                         _Anradan son of_
 Flathbertaigh                       _Flaherty_.


                                  IV.

   Clans supposed to be descended from CORC, son of Lughaidh, king of
                     Munster, of the line of Heber.


                                   I.

 Mungfhionn ingen Fearadaig[560]     Mungfinn daughter of Feradach
 Finn Feachtnaigh righ               Finn Fachtnaigh king of the
 Cruithneach Alban[561] mathair      Picts of Alban was the mother
 ceithre mhic do Corc .i.            of four sons to Corc, viz.
 Cairbre Cruithnechan agus           Cairbre Cruithnechan and
 Maine Leamna a quo                  Maine Leamna from whom are
 Leamnuigh an Alban                  the people of Lennox in Alban.
 Cairbre a quo Eoganacht             From Cairbre are the Eoganacht
 Muighegearrain in Alban[562]        of the Mearns in Alban.
 Cairbre Luachra a quo               Cairbre Luachra from whom
 Eoganacht Locha Lein                are the Eoganacht of Lochalein,
 agus Aois arta agus Aois            Aos Arta, Aos Alla and Aos
 Alla agus Aois greine               Greine;
 Cronan a quo Cruithn                Cronan from whom are the
 rige Eamain                         Cruithnigh of the kingdom of
                                     Eamania.
 An da Cairbre .i. Cairbre           The two Cairbres viz. Cairbre
 Luachra[563] agus Cairbre           Luachra and Cairbre Cruthnechan,
 Cruthneachan amus diobh             settled in Alban on
 an Alban orba mathair               the inheritance of their
 do Cruithneachanuibh                mother who was of the Picts
 Alban .i. Cairbre Cruthneachan      of Alban viz. Cairbre Cruthnechan
 a Muighgearrain                     in the Mearns
 agus Maine Leamna a                 and Maine Leamna in
 Muighe Leamna                       the plain of the Leven.

-----

Footnote 560:

  From MS. T. C. D., H. 25. There is another edition of this legend in
  MS. Bod. Rawl., 502.

Footnote 561:

  The Bodleian MS. has Cruithintuath, that is, Pictland.

Footnote 562:

  The Bod. MS. adds ‘dia rabi Aengus ri Albain,’ ‘through whom was
  Angus, king of Alban,’ a name given by Tighernac to Angus, son of
  Fergus, king of the Picts, who died in 761.

Footnote 563:

  Cairbre Luachra is here inserted by mistake for Maine Leamna.


                                  II.

 GENEALACH MORMAOR LEAMNA ANSO       GENEALOGY OF THE MORMAERS OF LENNOX
   SIOS[564]                           DOWN HERE.
 Donnchach mac                       Duncan (_eighth earl of Lennox_)
                                       son of
 Baltair mic                         Walter[565] (_de Fasselane_) son of
 Amlaimh mic                         Awley son of
 Donnchach mic                       Duncan son of
 Amlaoimh og mic                     Awley the young, son of
 Amlaoimh mor mic                    Awley mor, son of
 Ailin mic                           Ailin (_second earl of Lennox_) son
                                       of
 Ailin mor mic                       Ailin mor (_first earl of Lennox_)
                                       son of
 Muireadhaigh mic                    Muredach son of
 Maoldomhnaigh mic                   Maeldovnaigh _son of_
 Maine Leamna mic                    _Maine Leamna son of_
 Cuirc mic                           _Corc son of_
 Lughaidh                            _Lughaidh_.

-----

Footnote 564:

  From MS. T. C. D., H. 1, 7; and MS. 1467.

Footnote 565:

  Walter de Fasselane married Margaret, daughter and heiress of Donald,
  sixth Earl of Lennox. His father Alan is by the peerage-writers
  identified with Awley, grandson of Aluin, second earl, but this would
  put him in the same generation with his wife’s grandfather. This
  pedigree supplies the omitted links.


                                   V.

 Clans supposed to be descended from the Kings of Dalriada in Scotland.

First Group—Clans descended from Fearchar fada, son of Fearadach of the
               Tribe of Lorn, king of Dalriada; died 697.


                                   I.

 GENEALACH CLANN DUBH[566]           GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN DUFF.
 Maelsnechta mac                     Maelsnectai (_king of Moray, d.
                                       1085_) son of
 Lulaig mic                          Lulach (_king of Scotland, d.
                                       1058_) son of
 Gillicomgan mic                     Gillcomgan (_Mormaer of Moray, d.
                                       1032_) son of
 Maelbrigde mic                      Maelbrigda son of
 Ruadri mic                          Ruadri son of
 Domnall mic                         Donald son of
 Morgaind mic                        Morgan son of
 Domnall mic                         Donald son of
 Cathmail mic                        Cathmail son of
 Ruadri mic                          Ruadri _son of_
 Aircellach mic                      _Aircellach son of_
 Ferchair fhoda mic                  _Ferchar fada son of_
 Fearadaig mic                       _Feradach son of_
 Fergusa mic                         _Fergus, son of_
 Sneachtain mic                      _Sneachtain son of_
 Colmain mic                         _Colman son of_
 Buadan mic                          _Buadan son of_
 Eathaig mic                         _Ethach son of_
 Muredaig mic                        _Muredaig son of_
 Loarn moir mic                      _Loarn mor son of_
 Eirc mic                            _Erc son of_
 Ethach munreamhar                   _Ethach munreamhar_.
 MacBiad mac                         Macbeth (_king of Scotland, d.
                                       1058_) son of
 Finnlaeic mic                       Findlaech (_Mormaer of Moray, d.
                                       1020_) son of
 Ruadri mic                          Ruadri son of
 Domnall mic                         Donald son of
 Morgainn                            Morgan.

-----

Footnote 566:

  This genealogy occurs in the Books of Leinster, Ballimote, and Leccan,
  in MS. 1467, MS. Bod. Rawl., 502, and T. C. D., H. 2, 18, where it is
  called the Genealogy of the Clan Duff, in the Book of Leinster the
  Clan Lulaigh, in MS. Bod. Ri Alban.


                                  II.

 GENELACH MIC NEACHTAIN[567]         GENEALOGY OF MACNACHTAN.
 Muiris mac                          Maurice son of
 Malcolum mic                        Malcom son of
 Muiris mic                          Maurice son of[568]
 Maelcoluim mic                      Malcolm son of
 Gibuin mic                          Gilbert[569] son of
 Ferchaer mic                        Ferchard son of
 Gillchrist mic                      Gilchrist son of
 Domnaill mic                        Donald son of
 Neachtain mic                       Nachtan son of
 Artuir mic                          Arthur son of
 Gibuin mic                          Gilbert son of
 Neachtain mic                       Nachtan son of
 Isog mic                            Isaac son of
 Gillamartain mic                    Gillamartan son of
 Aengusa mic                         Angus son of
 Imhair mic                          Ivor son of
 Neachtain og mic                    Nachton the young, son of
 Neachtain nisin mic                 Nachtan of the wounds, son of
 Neachtan moir mic                   Nachtan mor _son of_
 Domnaill duinn mic                  _Donald donn (or the brown) son of_
 Ferchair fada mic                   _Ferchar fada son of_
 Feradaigh mic                       _Feradach son of_
 Fergusa mic                         _Fergus son of_
 Neachtan mic                        _Neachtan son of_
 Colmain mic                         _Colman son of_
 Buadan mic                          _Buadan son of_
 Eathach mic                         _Eathach son of_
 Muiredaig mic                       _Muredach son of_
 Loarn moir mic                      _Loarn mor son of_
 Eirc mic                            _Erc son of_
 Echach muinreamhair                 _Ethach munreamhar_.

-----

Footnote 567:

  From MS. 1467.

Footnote 568:

  Maurice MacNaughton has a charter from Colin Campbell of Lochow of
  lands in Over Lochow.


                                  III.

 DO GENELACH CLANN AN TOISIGH ANNSO  GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN AN TOSHACH
   .I. CLANN GILLACATAN[570]           HERE, VIZ. THE CLAN GILLACHATTAN.
 William agus Domnall da mhic        William and Donald two sons of
 William mic                         William son of
 Ferchair mic                        Ferchard (_mentioned in 1383_) son
                                       of
 William mic                         William son of
 Gillamichol mic                     Gillamichael son of
 Ferchair mic                        Ferchard son of
 Disiab mic                          Shaw son of
 Gillacrist mic                      Gilchrist son of
 Aigcol mic                          Aigcol son of
 Eogain mic                          Ewen son of
            mic mic                       son of the son of
 Neill                               Neill.
 Lochlaine mac                       Lochlan son of
 Suibne mic                          Suibhne son of
 Disiab mic                          Shaw son of
 Leoid mic                           Leod son of
 Tsead mic                           Scayth (_mentioned in 1338_) son of
 Ferchar mic                         Ferchard son of
 Gillacrist mic                      Gilchrist son of
 Maelcolaim mic                      Malcolm son of
 Domnaill renabarta                  Donald, called the
 in Caimgilla mic                    Caimgilla, son of
 Mureach mic                         Mureach son of
 Suibne mic                          Suibhne son of
 Teadh mic                           Tead son of
 Neachtain mic                       Nachtain son of
 Gillachatain o fuiled Clann         Gillachattan, from whom descended
   Gillacatan mic                      the Clann Gillachattan, son of
 Gallbrait mic                       Gallbrait son of
 Diarmada renabarta                  Diarmad called
 an Fear Leighinn mic                  the Lector, _son of_
 Erc mic                             _Erc son of_
 Conlait mic                         _Conlaith son of_
 Fearchair fota mic                  _Ferchar fada son of_
 Fearadaigh                          _Feradach_.

-----

Footnote 569:

  In 1292 terra Gilberti MacNaughton.

Footnote 570:

  From MS. 1467.


                                  IV.

 GENELACH CLANN MAELANFHAIGH         GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN MILLONY OR
   (CLANN GILLACAMSROIN)[571]          CLAN CAMERON.
 Eoghan mac                          Ewen son of
 Domnall duibh mic                   Donald dubh son of
 Ailin maelanfaid mic                Allan Millony son of
 Poil mic                            Paul son of
 Gillapadruig mic                    Gillapatrick son of
 Gillamartain mic                    Gillamartan son of
 Poil mic                            Paul son of
 Mailanfaid mic                      Millony son of
 Gillroid a quo Gillacamsroin agus   Gilleroth,[572] from whom descended
   clann Maelanfaigh                   the Clan Cameron
 o fuilid[573] ... mic               and Clan Millony, son of
 Gillamartain og mic                 Gillamartan og son of
 Gillaganiorgan (?) mic              Gillaniorgan son of
 Gillamartan moir mic                Gillamartan mor son of
 Gilleogain mic mic                  Gilleewen son of
 Gillapaill mic                      Gillapaul son of
 Eacada mic                          Eacada son of
 Gartnaid mic                        Gartnaid son of
 Digail mic                          Digail son of
 Pouilacin mic                       Pouilacin son of
 Airt mic                            Art son of
 Aengusa moir mic                    Angus mor son of
 Erc mic                             Erc son of
 Telt                                Telt.


 Second Group—Clans descended from Fearchar abraruadh, son of Fearadach
                       Finn of the Tribe of Lorn.

 GENEALACH MHIC GILLEOIN[574]        GENEALOGY OF THE MACLEANS.
 Lochloinn mac                       Lachlan son of
 Eachduinn mhic                      Eachduinn (or Hector) son of
 Lochloinn mhic                      Lachlan son of
 Eoin mhic                           John son of
 Giollacolum mhic                    Malcolm son of
 Maoiliosa mhic                      Maoiliosa son of
 Gilleeoin mhic                      Gilleeoin son of
 Mecraith mhic                       MacRath son of
 Maoilsruthain mhic                  Maolsruthain son of
 Neill mhic                          Neill son of
 Conduilig .i. Ab Leasamoir mhic     Cuduilig, Abbot of Lismore, son of
 Raingce mhic                        Raingce son of
 Sean Dubhgaill Sgoinne mhic         Old Dougall of Scone, _son of_
 Fearchar abradruaidh mhic           _Ferchar abraruaidh son of_
 Fearadhaigh reambraidhte mhic       _Feradach, above mentioned, son of_
 Fergusa, ut supra, mhic             _Fergusa, as above, son of_
 Neachtain, etc.                     _Neachtan_, _etc_.
 Tri meic Raingce .i.                Raingce had three sons, viz.
 Cucatha a quo Clann Chonchatha      Cucatha[575] from whom the Clan
   iccric Leamhna agus                 Conchatha, in the district of
                                       Lennox, and
 Cusidhe a quo Clann Consithe a Bhib Cusidhe,[575] from whom the Clan
   agus                                Consithe in Fife and
 Cuduiligh a quo Clann Conduiligh    Cuduilig, from whom the Clan
   .i.  Clann mec Gille-Eoin in        Conduilig, that is, the Clan
   oilenaibh Muile                     MacLean in the island of Mull.
 Gilleeoin mac Mecraith tri meic les Gilleeoin son of MacRath had three
   .i. Bristi, Giollabrighde agus      sons, Bristi, Gillebride, and
   Maoliosa                            Maoliosa.
 Giollacolum mac Maoilosa tri meic   Malcolm son of Maoliosa had three
   les .i.                             sons, viz.
 Domhnall Niall agus Eoin Rioghnach  Donald, Niall, and John.[576]
   inghean Gamhail Mormair Cairrige    Rignach, daughter of Gamail, lord
   mathair an trir sin                 of Carrick, was the mother of
                                       these three sons.
 Maoliosa agus Eoin da mac an        Maoliosa and John were the two sons
   Domhnaill sin. Beatog agus          of the above Donald. Beatrice and
   Aithbric a dha ingen                Aithbric his two daughters.
 Niall umorro da mhac les .i.        Niall moreover had two sons, viz.
   Diarmuid agus Giollacoluim          Diarmad and Malcolm.
 Eoin diu da mhac maithe les .i.     John had long before two good sons,
   Lochloinn agus Eachdhonn            viz. Lachlan and Hector.
 Lachluinn cuig mec les .i. Eoin,    Lachlan had five sons, viz. John,
   Eachdhonn, Lochlainn Niall agus     Hector, Lachlan. Niall, and
   Somhairle                           Somerled.
 Fionnghuala agus Maria a dha ingen  Finnguala and Maria were his two
                                       daughters.
 Eachdonn mac Eoin clann lais .i.    Hector, son of John, had these
   Murchadh, Donnall,                  sons, viz. Murdoch, Donald,
 Toirrdhealbach, Eoghan,             Charles, Ewen,
 Tamas agus Gillecaluim              Thomas, and Malcolm.
 Clann Crisitiona ingene Macleoid    They were the sons of Cristina,
   .i. Murcadh mac                     daughter of MacLeod, viz. of
                                       Murdoch, son of
 Tormoid mhic                        Tormoid son of
 Leoid mhic                          Leod son of
 Gillemuire mhic                     Gillemuire son of
 Raice mhic                          Raice son of
 Olbair snoice mhic                  Olbair snoice son of
 Gillemuire. Ealga fholtalainn       Gillemuire. Ealga of the beautiful
   ingean Arailt mic Semmair righ      locks daughter of Harald son of
   Lochlan mathair an Gillemuire sin   Semmair, king of Lochlann (_or
                                       Norway_) was the mother of that
                                       Gillemure.


 Third Group—Clans descended from Donald donn, son of Fearadach Finn of
                           the Tribe of Lorn.


                                   I.

 GENEALACH CLANN LABHRAN[577] ANSO   GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN LAWREN HERE.
 Eain agus Domnall agus              John and Donald and
 Anilgolga oig mhic                  Anichol the young, sons of
 Colim mhic                          Malcolm son of
 Domnaill mhic                       Donald son of
 Eogain mhic                         Ewen son of
 Barthur mhic                        Walter son of
 Ab Achtus mhic                      The Abbot of Achtus[578] son of
 Aeid mhic                           Aedh son of
 Eogain mhic                         Ewen son of
 Iaig mhic                           Iaig son of
 Disiab mhic                         Shaw son of
 Gillacrist mhic                     Gilchrist son of
 Gillamicol mhic                     Gillamichael son of
 Pilip mhic                          Philip son of
 Finlaeic oig mhic                   Finlaech og son of
 Finlaeic moir mhic                  Finlaech mor son of
 Dubgaill mhic                       Dougall son of
 Baltuir mhic                        Walter son of
 Carlusa mhic                        Carlusa _son of_
 Domnaill oig mhic                   _Donald og son of_
 Domnaill duinn mhic                 _Donald donn son of_
 Fearadhach Finn                     _Feradach Finn_.

                                  II.

 GENEALACH CLANN AID ANNSO[579]      GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN AY HERE.
 Fearchair mac                       Ferchard son of
 Imair mhic                          Ivor son of
 Gillacrist mhic                     Gilchrist son of
 Gillaespic mhic                     Gilespic son of
 Gillananaemh mhic                   Gillananaemh son of
 Gillacrist mhic                     Gilchrist son of
 Cormac mhic                         Cormac son of
 Gillamitel mhic                     Gillamichael son of
 Aid mhic                            Aidh son of
 Gallbuirt mhic                      Gallbuirt son of
 Gillacatan mhic                     Gillacatan son of
 Domnaill mhic                       Donald son of
 Eogain mhic                         Ewen son of
 Pilip mhic                          Philip son of
 Disiab mhic                         Shaw son of
 Eirdi mhic                          Erdi son of
 Aengusa mhic                        Angus son of
 Finlaeic mhic                       Finlaech son of
 Carla mhic                          Carla _son of_
 Domnaill oig mhic                   _Donald og son of_
 Domnaill duinn mhic                 _Donald donn son of_
 Feradhach                           _Feradach_.

Fourth Group—Clans said to be descended from Cormac, son of Airbeartach.

                                   I.

    Clans said to be descended from FERADACH FINN through Cormac mac
                              Airbeartach.

                                   I.

 GENEALACH CLANN AINNRIAS[580]       GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN ANDRES.
 Pal mac                             Paul son of
 Tire mhic                           Tire son of
 Eogain mhic                         Ewen son of
 Muredaig mhic                       Muredach son of
 Poil mhic                           Paul son of
 Gilleainnrias mhic                  Gillandres son of
 Martain mhic                        Martin son of
 Poil mhic                           Paul son of
 Cainnig mhic                        Kenneth son of
 Cristin mhic                        Cristin son of
 Eogain mhic                         Ewen son of
 Cainnig mhic                        Kenneth son of
 Cristin mhic                        Cristin son of
 Gillaeoin na hairde mhic            Gillaeoin of the Aird, son of
 Eirc mhic                           Erc son of
 Loairn mhic                         Lorn son of
 Ferchair mhic                       Ferchard son of
 Cormac mhic                         Cormac son of
 Airbertaigh mhic                    Airbertach _son of_
 Fearadhach                          _Feradach_.

                                  II.

 GENEALACH CEANN CAINNIG[581]        GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN KENNETH
 Murchaid mac                        Murdoch son of
 Cainnig mhic                        Kenneth son of
 Eoin mhic                           John son of
 Cainnig mhic                        Kenneth son of
 Aongusa mhic                        Angus son of
 Cristin mhic                        Cristin[582] son of
 Cainnig[583] mhic                   Kenneth son of
 Gillaeoin oig mhic                  Gilleeoin og son of
 Gillaeoin na hairde                 Gilleeoin of the Aird.

                                  III.

 GENEALACH MHIC MATGAMNA[584] ANSO   GENEALOGY OF THE MATHESONS DOWN
   SIS                                 HERE.
 Murechach mac                       Murdoch son of
 Donncaig mhic                       Duncan son of
 Murechach mhic                      Murdoch son of
 Donnchach mhic                      Duncan son of
 Murechach mhic                      Murdoch son of
 Cainnig mhic                        Kenneth[585] son of
 Matgamna mhic                       Matgamna (_or Mahan_) son of
 Cainnig mhic                        Kenneth son of
 Cristin                             Cristin.

                                  IV.

 GENEALACH MHIC DUIBSITHI ANSO[586]  GENEALOGY OF MACDUFFY HERE.
 Domnall agus Niall agus             Donald and Niall and
 Gillacolaim tri mhic                Malcolm the three sons of
 Gillaespic mhic                     Gillespic son of
 Gillacrist mhic                     Gillchrist son of
 Gillacoluim mhic                    Malcolm son of
 Dubgaill mor mhic                   Dougall mor son of
 Duibsith mhic                       Dubshithe (_or Duffy_) son of
 Murechach mhic                      Murdoch son of
 Finlaeic cais mhic                  Finlaech cas son of
 Murechach mhic                      Murdoch son of
 Ferchair mhic                       Ferchard son of
 Cormac mhic                         Cormac son of
 Airbeartaigh mhic                   Airbertach _son of_
 Fearadaigh                          _Feradach_.

                                  II.

 Clans said to be descended from FEARCHAIR ABRARUADH through Cormac mac
                              Airbeartach.

 DO GENEALACH MHIC AN ABA EGNE[587]  THE GENEALOGY OF THE MACNABS.
 Gillamure mac                       Gillamure son of
 Eogain mhic                         Ewen son of
 Aengusa mhic                        Angus son of
 Macbethad mhic                      Macbeth son of
 Aengusa mhic                        Angus son of
 Gillamure loganaig mhic             Gillemure Loganaig son of
 Ferchair mhic                       Ferchard son of
 Finnlaeic mhic                      Finnlaech son of
 Donnchaich mhic                     Duncan son of
 Firtired mhic                       Firtired son of
 Gillafaelan mhic                    Gillafaelan son of
 Gillamartan mhic                    Gillamartan son of
 Firtiread mhic                      Firtired son of
 Loairn mhic                         Lorn son of
 Fearchar mhic                       Ferchard son of
 Cormac mhic                         Cormac son of
 Airbeartaigh mhic                   Airbertach _son of_
 Erc mhic                            _Erc son of_
 Domnaill duinn mhic                 _Donald donn son of_
 Ferchar abraruadh mhic              _Ferchar Abraruadh son of_
 Feradaig                            _Feradach_.

                                  III.

    Clans said to be descended from FEARCHAR FADA through Cormac mac
                              Airbertach.

 GENEALACH CLANN GRIGAIR[588]        GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN GREGOR.
 Malcolaim Mac                       Malcolm son of
 Padruic mhic                        Patrick son of
 Eoin mhic                           John son of
 Gregair mhic                        Gregor son of
 Donnchaich mhic                     Duncan son of
 Maeilcolaim mhic                    Malcolm son of
 Gillacrist mhic                     Gillchrist son of
 Ferchair mhic                       Ferchard son of
 Muredaigh mhic                      Murdoch son of
 Ainnrias mhic                       Annrias (_or Andrew_) son of
 Cormac mhic                         Cormac son of
 Airbertaigh mhic                    Airbertach _son of_
 Fearchar oig mhic                   _Ferchar og son of_
 Fearchair fada mhic                 _Ferchar fada son of_
 Fearadach finn                      _Feradach finn_.

                                  IV.

 Clans said to be descended from FEARCHAR FADA through Macbeth, son of
                  Finlaech, and Cormac mac Airbertach.

                                   I.

 DO GENEALACH CLANN GUAIRE[589]      THE GENEALOGY OF THE CLAN QUARRY.
 Ceallach mac                        Cellach son of
 Poil mhic                           Paul son of
 Cellach in enig mhic                Cellach, the liberal, son of
 Turcaill mhic                       Torquill son of
 Ceallaig mhic                       Cellach son of
 Guaire mhic                         Guaire (_or Quarry_) son of
 Cormaic mhic                        Cormac son of
 Arbertaig mhic                      Airbertach _son of_
 Murechach mhic                      _Murechach son of_
 Fearchair [oig] mhic                _Ferchach og son of_
 Mic Beathaidh mhic                  _Macbeth son of_
 Finlaeic mhic                       _Finnlaech son of_
 Fearchar fada mhic                  _Ferchar fada son of_
 Fearadaig mhic                      _Feradach son of_
 Fergusa                             _Fergus_.
 Turcuill Guaire agus Cormac tri     Torquill, Guaire, and Cormac, three
   meic eile Poil mhic Ceallaig        other sons of Paul, son of
   anoinigh                            Cellach, the liberal.

                                  II.

 DO GENEALACH MHIC FINGAINE[590]     THE GENEALOGY OF THE MACKINNONS.
 Niall mac                           Niall son of
 Gillabrigde mhic                    Gillebride son of
 Eogain mhic                         Ewen son of
 Gillabrigde mhic                    Gillebride son of
 Sean Eogain mhic                    Old Ewen son of
 Finlaeic mhic                       Finlaech son of
 Fingainne o fuiled Clann Fingaine   Fingaine, from whom came the Clan
   mhic                                Fingaine (_or Mackinnons_) son of
 Cormac mhic                         Cormac son of
 Airbeartaigh mhic                   Airbertach _son of_
 Murchertaigh mhic                   _Muirchertach son of_
 Fearchair oig etc.                  _Ferchar og_ _etc_.
 Fionnguine Ab Hi dearbhrathair do   Fingaine Abbot of Iona was
   Niall mhic Gillebrigde              brother-german of Niall son of
                                       Gillebride.

                                  III.

 GENEALACH MHICGILLA MAOIL[591]      GENEALOGY OF THE MACMILLANS.
 Gillacoluim og mac                  Malcolm the young, son of
 Gillacoluim moir mhic               Malcolm mor son of
 Maolmuire mhic                      Maolmure son of
 Cainn mhic                          Cainn son of
 Dubgaill mhic                       Dougall son of
 Gillacoluim mhic                    Malcolm son of
 Gillacrist dar comhaimn an          Gillchrist called an Gillamaol (_or
   Gillamaol agus Clann an Mail mhic   the tonsured servant_) from whom
                                       are the Clan an Mail (_or
                                       MacMillans_) son of
 Cormaic mhic                        Cormac son of
 Airbeartaigh reamraieth             Airbertach aforesaid
 a se an tairbertach sin do aitreabh This Airbertach had twelve tribes
   da threibh deg i Fionnlochlannach   inhabiting the Norwegian
   .i. Greagraidhe na ngaisgeathach    territory, viz. Greagraid of the
   das comainim Muile agus Tir no      Champions, commonly called Mull
   Tire aodha agus Cruibhinis, no      and Tiroda (Tiree) and Cruibhinis
   Craobhinis                          or Craobhinis (or _Island of
                                       Bushes_).[592]

                                  IV.

 GENEALACH MHIC GILLAAGAMNAN[593]    GENEALOGY OF THE MACLENNANS.
 Amarechach mhic                     Murdoch son of
            mhic                             son of
            mhic                             son of
 Murechach mhic                      Murdoch son of
           mhic                              son of
 Donnchach mhic                      Duncan son of
 Nicail mhic                         Nicail son of
 Gillaagamnan o fuil an fine[594]    Gillaagamnan, from whom came the
   mhic                                clan, son of
 Cormac mhic                         Corman son of
 Airbertaigh                         Airbertach.

-----

Footnote 571:

  From MS. 1467.

Footnote 572:

  This is the Gilleroth mentioned by Fordun in 1222 as a follower of
  Gillespic Macohecan in his insurrection, along with whom he witnesses
  a charter as Gilleroth son of Gillemartan.

Footnote 573:

  There is a sentence here so defaced as to be hardly legible. The words
  ‘Clann ... Maelanfaig agus rac an sreoin ic Gillanfaigh’ may be made
  out, and imply that the MacGillonies of Strone were his descendants.

Footnote 574:

  From MS. 1647, MacFirbis and MacVurich, Hector and Lauchlan have
  charters from the Lord of the Isles of Dowart.

Footnote 575:

  The names Cucatha and Cusidhe mean respectively the dog of war and the
  dog of peace.

Footnote 576:

  Dofnaldus MacGilhon, Johannes et Nigellus filii Gilhon appear in the
  Exchequer Rolls in 1326.

Footnote 577:

  From MS. 1467.

Footnote 578:

  The name of this abbot not given, but it must have been Labhran, from
  whom the clan takes its name.

Footnote 579:

  From MS. 1467.

Footnote 580:

  From MS 1467. The Earl of Ross grants a charter in 1366 to Paul
  Mactyre of the lands of Gerloch.

Footnote 581:

  From MS. 1467 and MacVurich.

Footnote 582:

  Gilchrist filius Kinedi appears in 1222 as a follower of MacWilliam.

Footnote 583:

  MS. 1467 has Agad by mistake for Cainnig, correctly given by
  MacVurich.

Footnote 584:

  From MS. 1467 and MacVurich.

Footnote 585:

  Kermac Macmaghan appears in the Exchequer Rolls in 1264.

Footnote 586:

  From MS. 1467.

Footnote 587:

  From MS. 1467.

Footnote 588:

  From MS. 1467.

Footnote 589:

  From MS. 1467 and MacFirbis.

Footnote 590:

  From MS. 1467 and MacFirbis.

Footnote 591:

  From MS. 1467 and MacFirbis.

Footnote 592:

  This is said to be an old name for Iona.

Footnote 593:

  From MS. 1467. Some of the names cannot be read.

Footnote 594:

  The Clan is here called Finé.




                                 INDEX.




                                 INDEX.


 Abbacia or Abthanrie, definition of, ii. 343, 393; iii. 261,
    283.
 Abbacy, law of succession to, ii. 66.
 Aberbuthnot, thanage of, iii. 259.
 Abercorn (Aebbercurnig), i. 368;
   monastery, 133, 262, 268; ii. 224.
 Aberdeen, bishopric of, ii. 378;
   thanage of, iii. 86, 253.
 Aberdour (Fifeshire), church of, dedicated to St. Fillan, ii. 33.
 Aberkerdor, thanage of, iii. 251.
 Aberlemno (Aberlemenach), thanage of, iii. 262, 264.
 Abernethy (site of Orrea?), i. 74;
   church of, said to be founded by Nectan, 135; ii. 32;
   also by Garnard, i. 305;
   homage of Malcolm Ceannmor at, 424;
   church of, dedicated to St. Bridget, ii. 309, 326;
   round tower of, built by Irish clergy, _temp_. Kenneth MacAlpin,
      309-10;
   primacy transferred to, _ib_.
 Abers and Invers, on the distribution of, i. 220-222.
 Aberte. _See_ Dunaverty.
 Aboyne. _See_ Obeyn.
 Abravannus, river (the Luce), i. 66.
 Abthanries, iii. 83, 261, 283.
 Acca, bishop in Hexham, i. 275; ii. 222.
 Adamnan, ninth abbot of Hii or Iona, i. 245, 269;
   his first mission to Northumbria, ii. 170;
   repairs the monastery of Iona, 171;
   second mission to Northumbria, 171;
   is converted to the prevalent manner of keeping Easter, 172;
   attends the Synod of Tara, 173;
   his death, 173.
 Adamnan’s _Life of Columba_, i. 28.
 Add, river, i. 68, 216; iii. 129.
 Adhelstan, (legendary) king of the Saxons, i. 297-299.
 Adrian, St., legend of, i. 320; ii. 311.
 Aebba, first abbess of Coldingham, ii. 200.
 Aed, son of Boanta, Dalriada governed by, i. 305, 308.
 Aed, son of Kenneth, king of the Picts (A.D. 877), i. 328-9.
 Aed, son of Neill, king of Ireland, i. 330.
 Aeda Allan, head of the Cinel Eoghan, defeats Flaithbertach, king of
    Ireland, i. 289-90.
 Aedh (Aed Finn), son of Eachach, slain in attempting to restore the
    kingdom of Dalriada, i. 300.
 Aedh, king of Ailech, gives battle to the fleet of the Gallgaidhel, i.
    312.
 Aedh Finnliath, king of Ireland, i. 313.
 Aedilbald, king of Mercia, invades Northumbria (A.D. 740), i. 291.
 Aedilfrid, king of Bernicia and Deira, i. 236, 239, 244;
   his sons take refuge in Iona, ii. 153.
 Aeduin (Edwyn), son of Ella, expelled from his kingdom of Deira by
    Aedilfrid, regains it and also Bernicia, i. 239, 240;
   his name left in Edwinesburg (Edinburgh), 240;
   his conversion to Christianity, and baptism at York, ii. 154;
   slain at Hatfield, i. 243; ii. 155.
 Aelfred the Great, his struggles with the Danes, i. 349.
 Aelric, uncle of Aeduin, i. 244.
 Aethelstan (A.D. 925-40), grandson of Aelfred the Great, attacks
    Northumbria, i. 351,
     and invades Alban, 352;
   league of the northern populations against him, ᚬ v1 352-53ᚬ;
   victories in the battle of Brunanburg, ᚬv1 353-60ᚬ;
   his death, 359.
 Aëtius, his aid asked for by the Britons, i. 144, 148.
 Agned, Mt. (Edinburgh), i. 153, 238.
 Agrestes, laws relating to, iii. 244.
 Agricola, Julius, his arrival in Britain as governor, i. 41;
   extent of the Roman province at this time, 41, 42;
   favourable circumstances under which his government commenced, ᚬv1
      42ᚬ;
   characteristics of his administration, 43;
   defeats the Ordovices, 43;
   overruns districts on the Solway, 43, 44;
   ravages the Tay, 45;
   fortifies as far as isthmus between the Forth and the Clyde, 46,
      47;
   visits Argyll and Kintyre, 47;
   his three years’ war north of the Forth, ᚬv1 48-52ᚬ;
   battle of ‘Mons Granpius,’ ᚬv1 52>-56ᚬ;
   his recall, 57;
   result of his campaigns, 57;
   the Caledonian tribes resume their independence, ᚬv1 58-60ᚬ.
 Agricolæ, rustici, or husbandmen, laws relating to, iii. 244.
 Aicill, Book of, iii. 176 _seq_.
 Aidan, son of Gabran, inaugurated king of Dalriada by St. Columba, i.
    143, 229, 247, 249;
   his death, 239.
 Aidan, first bishop of Lindisfarne, i. 251; ii. 157;
   death of, i. 253;
   relics of, 259;
   dedications to, 260.
 Aidh, clan, iii. 344-5.
 Ailbhe, Cummene, fifth abbot of Iona, ii. 163.
 Ainbhcellaig, son of Fearchar Fada, king of Dalriada, i. 272;
   slain, 284.
 Airdross (Aird of Ross), a mountainous region in Ross-shire, iii. 344.
 Airgialla, Oirgialla, the term explained, i. ᚬv1 286-7ᚬ.
 Airthrey (Aithrie, Athran), i. 341; iii. 45.
 Alani, the. _See_ Vandals.
 Alaster (MacAlasters), clan, iii, 330, 404, 408, 410, 468.
 Alata Castra (the winged camp), a town of the Vacomagi, position of, i.
    74, 75.
 Alauna, town of, Inchkeith = the Giudi of Bede. _See_ Giudi.
 Alauna, a town of the Damnonii, i. 74.
 Alaunus, river (Allan, in Northumberland), i. 66.
 Alban, history of the men of, iii. 213.
 Alban, Albania, an early appellation of that part of Britain situated
    to the north of the Forth and Clyde, i. 1, 2 (_see_
    Scotia);
   near the close of the ninth century the territory designated Pictavia
      is called the kingdom of Alban, 335;
   Donald, son of Constantin, and grandson of Kenneth mac Alpin, first
      king of Alban, ᚬv1 335-9ᚬ;
   its division into seven provinces as given by Andrew, bishop of
      Caithness, probably applicable to the time of Constantin, son of
      Aedh, 340; iii. 44 _seq_.;
   organisation of the provinces, i. 343;
   kingdom attacked by Aethelstan, 352;
   extent of the kingdom of Alban at the time when first designated
      Scotia, 395, 398;
   bishops of, ii. 323, 327, ᚬv2 329-331ᚬ _seq_.;
   Tract entitled _History of the Men of Alban_, i. 230; iii. 213.
 _Albanic Duan_, the, a poem of the eleventh century, i. 184.
 Albinus, Clodius, governor of Britain, i. 79;
   defeated and slain by Severus, at Lyons, 80.
 Alcluith, fastness of (Dumbarton), i. 130, 139;
   capital of the Britons of Alclyde, 236.
   _See_ Alclyde.
 Alclyde, Britons of, territory of the kingdom of, i. 235, ᚬv1
    365ᚬ;
   its population and capital, its monarchs (called kings of Alcluith),
      236;
   after thirty years’ subjection to the Angles, 256, they recover
      their independence, 267, 271;
   subjugated by Eadberct and Angus, ᚬv1 294-6ᚬ;
   the capital besieged by the Northmen under Amlaiph and Imhair, ᚬv1
      324ᚬ;
   the term Cumbri first applied to the Strathclyde Britons, 326;
   regain their independence, and elect Donald, son of Aedh, king of
      Alban, as their ruler, 346;
   ravaged by the Saxons, and ceded to the Scots, 362.
   _See_ Cumbria.
 Alcred, king of Northumbria, i. 300.
 Aldborough (Ealdburg), i. 359.
 Aldfrid, king of Northumbria, i. 268.
 Aldgaitha, half-sister of Ealdred, earl of Northumbria, i. 394,
    408, 419.
 Aldred, son of Eadulf or Athulf, commander of Bamborough, i. 373.
 Aldred (Ealdred), son of Uchtred, earl of Bernicia, i. 399, ᚬv1
    408ᚬ.
 Aldred, archbishop of York, i. 413.
 Aldun, Bishop, i. 385.
 Alexander I., son of Malcolm Ceannmor, reigns seventeen years (A.D.
    1107-24), i. 447;
   founds the monastery of Scone, 447;
   also a priory on the island of Lochtay, 448;
   his struggle for the Church’s independence, ᚬv1 448-451ᚬ;
   founds a monastery on the island of Inchcolm, 451;
   dies at Stirling, and is buried in Dunfermline, 454.
 Alexander II., son of William the Lion, crowned at Scone, reigns
    thirty-five years (A.D. 1214-49), i. 483;
   an insurrection against, headed by the families of MacWilliam and
      MacEth subdued by Ferquhard Macintagart of Applecross, 483;
   subdues Argyll, 484,
     and Galloway, 487;
   attempts the reduction of the Western Isles, 489;
   dies at Kerrera, 490.
 Alexander III., crowned at Scone, reigns thirty-six years (A.D.
    1249-1285), i. 490;
   ceremony at his coronation, 490;
   regency during his minority, 492;
   contests the sovereignty of the Western Isles with king Hakon of
      Norway, 492,
     whom he defeats at Largs, 494;
   annexes said Isles to the kingdom of Scotland, 495;
   deaths of all his family, 496;
   summons the Estates of Scotland to regulate the succession, 496;
   marries his second wife, i. 496;
   accidentally killed near Kinghorn, 497;
   Scotland consolidated into one feudal monarchy in his reign, iii. 1;
   English possessions, 5;
   physical aspect of Scotland at this time, 9-15;
   population composed of six races, 15 _seq_.;
   Estates of the realm in 1283, 39.
 Allan, river (Stirlingshire), i. 45.
 Allectus, a usurper, reigns three years in Britain, is defeated and
    slain by Constantius Chlorus, i. 93, 95, 129.
 Allelujatic victory, the, i. 150, 151.
 _Alltudion_, in the Welsh tribe, analogous to the Irish _Fuidhir_, iii.
    200.
 Almond, river (Perthshire), Roman camp at its junction with the Tay, i.
    45, 88, 266, 381.
   _See_ Tula Aman.
 —— river (Midlothian), i. 249, 381.
 Alphabets, the Irish and Ogham, ii. 449;
   Hill Burton’s opinion of the latter, ᚬv2 449-450ᚬ.
 Alpin (son of Eochaidh), king of the Picts (A.D. 726), i. 286;
   struggles after his accession, ᚬv1 287-9ᚬ;
   invades the Pictish province of Galloway, where he was slain, ᚬv1
      291-2ᚬ.
 Alpin, son of Wroid, king of the Picts (A.D. 775-80), called in the
    _Ulster Annals_ Elpin, king of the Saxons, i. 301.
 Alpin the Scot (A.D. 832-4), father of Kenneth mac Alpin, attacks the
    Picts and is slain, i. 306;
   traditional locality of the battle, ᚬv1 306-7ᚬ.
   _See_ Picts.
 Alwynus, bishop of Alban, ii. 336.
 Alyth, thanage of, iii. 276.
 Amlaimh (Amlaiph, Olaf), Norwegian king of Dublin, i. 313,
    324-326.
 Amlaiph (Olaf), son of Indulph, king of Alban, slain by Kenneth, i. ᚬv1
    370ᚬ.
 _Amra Choluim Chilli_, ancient tract, quoted, ii. 123, 145;
    iii. 210.
 Anchoretical life, its influence on the monastic church, ii. 233;
   early developed in Ireland and Scotland, 245.
 Anchorites, called _Deicolæ_, God-worshippers, ii. 238;
   also the people of God, 239;
   attempts to bring them under monastic rule, 240;
   brought under canonical rule, 242;
   their existence in the Saxon Church, 245;
   termed in Ireland _Deoraidh De_, 248;
   also _Ceile De_, 251;
   characteristics similar to the _Deicolæ_, 252;
   brought under canonical rule in Ireland, 254;
   in Scotland termed _Keledei_, 255;
   adopt the canonical rule, 276.
 Andres (Rosses), clan, iii. 330, 365, 484.
 Andrew, St., legends relating to, and the analysis of them, i. ᚬv1
    296-99ᚬ;
   churches dedicated to him, 298;
   Ceannrighmonaigh, the first name of the place where a church was
      founded in honour of his relics, which was then called
      Cellrighmonaid (Chilrymont, Kilrymont), 299;
   relics of, brought to Hexham church, founded in his honour, ii. ᚬv2
      221ᚬ.
 Andrew, bishop of Caithness, his account of the seven provinces of
    Albania, i. 340; iii. 44.
 Angles, the, invade Britain with the Saxons and Jutes, i. 149, ᚬv1
    189-192ᚬ; ii. 19;
   tribes of, and Frisians from the kingdom of Bernicia, i. 155;
   language of, 193;
   who they were and whence they came, 227;
   Osuiu obtains dominion over the Britons, Scots, and Picts, 256
      _seq_.;
   effect of the defeat and death of Ecgfrid, 267;
   position afterwards of the Picts, 268, Scots and Britons, ᚬv1
      271ᚬ;
   converted to Christianity, ii. 198.
 Angus, son of Fergus (Ungus, son of Uirguist), his reign as king of the
    Picts, i. 288, 296, ᚬv1 305-6ᚬ.
 Angus, son of Somerled, iii. 35, 39, 293, 400.
 Angus mor, son of Erc, king of Dalriada, iii. 120.
   _See_ Erc.
 Angus, Cinel, one of the three tribes of the Dalriadic kingdom,
    inhabiting Isla and Jura, i. 229.
 Angus, earldom of, iii. 289.
 Anlaf (Olaf, Anlaf Cuaran), son of Sitriuc, and son-in-law of
    Constantin, king of Alban, routed at Brunanburg, i. ᚬv1 352-7ᚬ;
   becomes king of Northumberland, 361;
   exercises authority in the Islands, 354; iii. 30;
   expelled by Eadmund, i. 361;
   died at Hi-Choluimcille, 364.
 Anlaf, son of Godfrey, king of the Danes of Dublin, i. 353, ᚬv1
    357ᚬ, 361.
 _Annales Cambriæ_, the, i. 145, 294.
 _Annals of the Four Masters_, i. 24, 25, 172; iii. ᚬv1
    108ᚬ, 113, _et passim_.
 Antona (the Don?), river, i. 35.
 Antoninus Pius, emperor, events in Britain in his reign, i. ᚬv1 76-79ᚬ;
   wall of, _see_ Roman walls.
 Antoninus Caracalla, emperor, son of Severus, makes peace with the
    barbarian British tribes, i. 90, 91.
 Anwoth, i. 136.
 Aonghus Mor, great-grandson of Somerled, espouses the cause of Baliol,
    iii. 401;
   descendants, 401.
 Aonghus Og (heir of Eoin), killed by his harper, iii. 404.
 Apostasy of early churches, ii. 39.
 Applecross (Aporcrosan), church of, founded by Maelrubha, ii. 169,
    285;
   condition of the church of, 411.
 Aralt, son of Sitriucc, lord of the Danes of Limerick, i. 376.
 Arbroath, monastery of, ii. 393;
   chartulary of, 394.
 Ardargie, Roman fort at, i. 45, 74.
 Ardchinnechun, i. 297.
 Ardcorann, battle of, i. 241.
 Arddanesbi, naval battle at, between Dalriadic tribes, i. 285.
 Ardderyd, battle of, i. 157.
 Ardnamurchan, iii. 428.
 Ardoch, great Roman camps at, i. 46, 54, 74, 88.
 Argathelia. _See_ Arregaithel.
 Argyll. _See_ Arregaithel.
 Aristotle, the British Isles alluded to by, under the names of Albion
    and Ierne, i. 30.
 Armagh, Book of, contents of, ii. 423.
 Arran, island of, i. 493; iii. 213, 439.
 Arregaithel (Argathelia, Airergaidhel, Earrgaoidheal), a district in
    the West of Scotland now called Argyll, iii. 48-51;
   visited by Agricola, i. 47, 48;
   traditionary accounts of the Scoti from Ireland effecting a
      settlement in Kintyre, ᚬv1 139-142ᚬ (_see_ Dalriada);
   becomes one of the seven provinces of the kingdom of Alban, or
      Scotia, 341; iii. 45;
   its name, and extent at different times, 46, 48-9, 343;
   partition of the province, 78;
   divided into sheriffdoms, 88;
   formation of the diocese of Argyll or Lismore, ii. 408.
 Artgha (Arthgal), king of Strathclyde, slain, i. 325.
 Arthur, the, of Nennius, and his battles with the Saxons, i. 152
    _seq_.
 Arthur’s O’on, i. 217.
 Asbiorn, Jarl, i. 420.
 Asclepiodotus, defeats Allectus, a usurper in Britain, i. 93.
 Athelstaneford, i. 298.
 Atholl, the name, i. 186, 220, 281;
   kings of, 281, 341;
   a Pictish and Albanic province, iii. 43, 46;
   earldom of, 270, 272;
   sketch of, 288.
 Attacotti, the, their territory, i. 101, 129;
   with Picts, Scots, and Saxons, invade the Roman provinces, 99;
      iii. 97;
   formed by Theodosius into Roman cohorts, and stationed in Gaul, i.
      101, 106;
   called Honoriani, 105;
   Attacots in Spain, 111.
 Augustine, St., bishop of Hippo, ii. 6.
 Augustine (Austin), his mission to the Angles (A.D. 596), i. 192.
 Aulus Didius, a Roman commander in Britain, i. 37.
 Avendale (in Clydesdale), i. 295.
 Avienus Festus Rufus, the British Isles mentioned in his _Description
    of the World_, i. 30.
 Avon, river. _See_ Antona.
 Avon (Hæfe), river, western boundary of the district of Lothian, i. ᚬv1
    240ᚬ, 241, 270, 291, 424.
 Ay, clan, iii. 483.

 Badenoch, the Wolf of, iii. 308-310.
 Badon Mount, the (Linlithgowshire), i. 145, 149;
   battle at, 153.
 Baedan, great-grandson of Loarn, i. 264.
   _See_ Kinelvadon.
 Baliol and Bruce, as claimants for the Crown, iii. 72-74.
 Ballimote, Book of, i. 172;
   poems from, quoted, iii. 92, 99;
   cited, 338, 466 _seq_.
 Balthere, St. (Baldred), church of, at Tyningham, destroyed by Anlaf,
    son of Godfrey, i. 361; ii. 223.
 Balthere the anchorite, his monastery at Tyninghame, ii. 223.
 Bamborough (Bebbanburch, Dinguardi, the Dun Guare), fort erected by Ida
    in, i. 155;
   the capital of Bernicia, 237, 332;
   attacked by Penda, 253;
   lords of, ᚬv1 373-4ᚬ.
 Banatia, town of the Vacomagi, i. 75.
 Banchory-Ternan, ii. 29.
 Banff, origin of the name, i. 220.
 Bangor, monastery of, founded by Comgall (A.D. 558), ii. 55.
 Barbarians, Britons who were hostile to the Romans so called, i. ᚬv1
    34ᚬ, 36.
 Bardi the White, i. 377.
 Barid, son of Ottir, the jarl, i. 347.
 Barra, isle of, iii. 387, 430.
 Barrichbyan, Campbells of, iii. 320.
 Bartha-firdi (Firth of Tay?) i. 310.
 Basque or Iberian race, a, preceded the Celts in Britain and Ireland,
    i. 164 _seq_.
 Bassas (Bonny?), river, i. 153.
 Battledykes, a great camp near Forfar, i. 86, 87.
 Beadulf, last Anglic bishop in Galloway, i. 311; ii. 225.
 Bean, St. (Beanus), ii. 326.
 Beath, the name, iii. 63 _n_.
 Becc, grandson of Dunchada, i. 273.
 Bede, the Venerable, i. 13; iii. 91;
   his account of the Picts, i. 123, 130, 133.
 Belerium, Belerion (Land’s End), promontory of, i. 31, 33.
 Belhelvie, thanage of, iii. 252.
 Bellachoir (Bellathor), near Scone, i. 320, 322.
 Benbecula, isle of, iii. 387.
 Benefices, hereditary succession in, ii. 338.
 Berchan, St., _Prophecy_ of, i. 142, 143, 325, 327,
    330, ᚬv1 338-9ᚬ, 403.
 Berct, a general of Ecgfrid’s, sent to ravage Ireland, i. ᚬv1 264-5ᚬ.
 Berctfrid, prefect of the Northumbrians, defeats the Picts of Manann,
    i. 270.
 Beregonium, a misprint of Boece for Rerigonium, i. 72; iii. 129.
 Bernaeth (Bernith), leader in the Pictish revolt against the Angles of
    Northumbria (A.D. 672), i. 260, 261, 270.
 Bernicia, Anglic kingdom of, i. 155, 156;
   its extension to the Firth of Forth, ᚬv1 236-37ᚬ; iii. 19;
   united with Deira, i. 252, 331, 372;
   attacked by the Northmen, ᚬv1 322-23ᚬ, 332;
   governed by lords of Bamborough, 373;
   Malcolm II. defeated in Northumbria, 385;
   cession of Lothian to the Scots, 393.
   _See_ Osuald, Osuiu.
 Beruvik (now Portyerrock), i. 390.
 Bethog, daughter of Somerled, iii. 400.
 Biceot, son of Moneit, slain, i. 288.
 Bile (Beli), son of Neithon, and father of Oan and Brude, i. 250,
    263.
 Bile, son of Alpin, king of Alclyde, i. 271, 285.
 Birrenswark hill, Roman remains on, i. 72.
 Birse, thanage of, iii. 256, 357.
 Bishops and Presbyters, relative position of, under the monastic rule,
    ii. 42.
 Black mail, i. 417.
 Blackwater, river (Raasay), i. 183, 319.
 Blair, hill and muir of, i. 53;
   battle of, iii. 405.
 Blairnroar, i. 328.
 Blathmac, son of Flann, martyrdom of, in Iona, i. 305; ii. ᚬv2
    300ᚬ, 305.
 Boadicea, or Bondiuca, queen of the Iceni, i. 38.
 Bochastle, Roman camp at, i. 45.
 Boderia of Ptolemy, and Bodotria of Tacitus = Firth of Forth, i. ᚬv1
    64ᚬ, 216.
 Bodleian MSS. cited, iii. 475-6.
 Boece, Hector, i. 11, 12, 27 _seq_.; ii. 314; iii.
    364.
 Boete (Bode), son of Kenneth, slain by Malcolm II., i. 399, ᚬv1
    406ᚬ.
 Boethius (Buitte), St., among the Picts, i. 135.
 Bolgyne, lands of, i. 406.
 Bonifacius, St. (Kiritinus), legend of, i. 277; ii. 229.
 Bonnach (Bonnage), a service exacted from tenants, iii. 256.
 Boroughbridge, i. ᚬv1 358-9ᚬ.
 Bovates (oxgangs) defined, iii. 224.
 Bower, cited, iii. 308 _seq_., _et al_.
 Bowness, i. 61.
 Boyd, isle of, iii. 430.
 Boyne, thanage of, iii. 86, 250.
 Bran, son of Angus, slain, i. 307.
 Brathwell (Braal) Castle, iii. 453.
 Breasal, first sole abbot of Iona after the schism (A.D. 772-801), ii.
    ᚬv2 288-90ᚬ.
 Brechin, dedication of, by Kenneth, son of Malcolm, i. 369;
   bishopric of, ii. ᚬv2 395-398ᚬ.
 Brechtraig, son of Bernith, slain, i. 270.
 Bredei, son of Wid. _See_ Garnaid.
 Breg (Bregia), plain of, devastated in A.D. 684 by Ecgfrid, i. ᚬv1
    265ᚬ;
   in A.D. 839, by the Galls, 307.
 Brehon Laws, excerpts from, iii. 145.
 Brekauche (Brecacha) Castle, Coll, description of, iii. 436.
 Bremenium, town of the Otadeni (High Rochester, in Ryddisdale), i. ᚬv1
    71ᚬ.
 Brendan, St., of Clonfert, ii. 76.
 Brian Boroimhe, leads the native tribes of Ireland against the Danes,
    i. 386;
   becomes king of all Ireland, 387;
   falls in the final conflict at Cluantarbh, when the Danes and their
      auxiliaries were defeated, 388.
 Bridei (Bred, Bredei, Brude, Bruidhe). _See_ Brude.
 Bridget, St., i. 135;
   _Lives of_, ii. 443.
 Brigantes, tribes of the, and their territory, i. 35, 71;
   their internal dissensions and subjugation by the Romans, ᚬv1 36-39ᚬ;
   overrun one of the provincial tribes, and are subdued by Lollius
      Urbicus, 76.
 Britain: Roman province in, _see_ Romans in Britain;
   obscurity of history after the departure of the Romans, i. 114;
   settlement of barbaric tribes in, 114, 115;
   ignorance of, by writers of sixth century, 115, 116;
   its position at the time as viewed from Rome, ᚬv1 117-9ᚬ;
   struggle for the dominion among the four races, 119 _seq_.;
   Professor Huxley on the ethnology of, ᚬv1 164-5ᚬ;
   Roman troops withdrawn from, ii. 4.
 Britannia, Prima and Secunda, two of the four Roman provinces of
    Britain, i. 96, 97, 103.
 British Isles, early notices of, i. 29 _seq_.
 Britons, provincial, influence of the Roman dominion on, i. 120;
   description of the two great classes into which they may be divided,
      and the territory occupied by them respectively, 121, ᚬv1
      123ᚬ;
   language of, 193;
   kingdom of the Britons of Alclyde, ᚬv1 235-6ᚬ;
   fall under the sway of the Angles, ᚬv1 256-7ᚬ;
   after thirty years they recover their liberty, 267;
   Strathclyde Britons conform to Rome, ii. 219.
 Broom, Loch, i. 183, 320, 376.
 Bruce, Collingwood, his work on the Roman Wall, i. 61, 91,
    112.
 Bruce, Robert. _See_ Baliol.
 Brude (Bridei), son of Mailcu, a Pictish king (A.D. 556-83) baptized by
    St. Columba, i. 136, 137, 142;
   defeats the Scots of Dalriada, ii. 78.
 Brude (Bredei), son of Bile, king of the Picts (A.D. 672-693), his
    father, and mother, and grandfather;
   elected king in place of Drost, i. ᚬv1 262-3ᚬ;
   called king of Fortrenn, 264, 268;
   his death, ᚬv1 268-9ᚬ;
   legend regarding his body, 269.
 Brude (Bridei), son of Derile, king of Picts (_ob_. 706), i. 270,
    295; ii. 258.
 Brude, son of Angus (A.D. 731-3), i. ᚬv1 289-90ᚬ.
 Brude, son of Fergus, king of the Picts (A.D. 761-63), i. 299.
 Brude (Bred), son of Ferat, king of the Picts (_ob_. 844), i. 309.
 Brude, son of Fotel, king of the Picts, i. 310.
 Brunanburg (Ætbrunnanmere, Brunnanbyrig, Duinbrunde, Vinheidi,
    Wendune), battle of (A.D. 937), i. ᚬv1 353-6ᚬ; iii. 30;
   site of, i. ᚬv1 357-9ᚬ.
 Brusi, son of Sigurd the Stout, i. 388, 401.
 _Brut of Tywysogion_, a Welsh Chronicle, i. 197, 294.
 Brutus (Brittus), the _eponymus_ of the Britons, iii. 94.
 Brychans, the two, and their families, ii. 36.
 Buchan, district of, i. 344;
   fleet of the Sumarlidi cut off there, ᚬv1 365-6ᚬ;
   Mormaers of, iii. 55;
   Toisechs of, 56;
   earldom of, 287.
   _See_ Mar.
 Buchanan, George, i. 12.
 Buchanan, Maurice (Book of Pluscarden), iii. 311 _seq_.
 Buchanan (W.), on the Highland Clans, iii. 349.
 Buchanty, Roman station at, i. 75.
 Burdens on land, iii. 228-36.
 Burghead, promontory of, i. 74, 75, 336.
 Burton, John Hill, referred to, i. 11, 22, 27, 52,
    140;
   his _History of Scotland_, 20, 21, 75, 196, ᚬv1
      248ᚬ, 495;
   his opinion of the Ogham character, ii. ᚬv2 449-50ᚬ.
 Bute, inhabitants of, called Brandanes, from St. Brandan, ii. 77;
   island of, iii. 89.
 Buzzard Dykes, the encampment of Galgacus’ forces at the battle of Mons
    Granpius, i. 53.

 Cadroë, St., legend from the Life of, i. 319;
   notice of, 325.
 Caech, loch da (Waterford), the Danes in, i. 347.
 Caedwalla (Catguollaun), king of the Britons, i. 243, 244.
 Cære, river. _See_ Carron.
 Caeredin (Carriden), a British town on the Forth, i. 238.
 Caerini, a northern tribe, i. 76.
 Caerleon (Isca Silurum), i. 81, 107.
 Caernech, St., legend of, ii. 46.
 Cailin, clan. _See_ Campbells.
 Cain and Conveth, dues from Crown lands, iii. 227-32, 262.
 Cairbre, surnamed Righfhada or Rioda, i. 140.
 Cairpentaloch, i. 153.
 Caislen Credi. _See_ Scone.
 Caithness (Cathanesia, Cathannia), in the Pictish legend the territory
    of Cait, one of the seven sons of Cruithne, i. 186;
   one of the seven provinces of the Pictish kingdom, 280; iii. ᚬv2
      44ᚬ;
   original extent of the district, i. 232;
   attacked by Thorstein the Red, 326;
   invaded by Sigurd, earl of Orkney, 336,
     and brought under Norwegian rule, 342, 345, 374;
        iii. 44, 45;
   Thorfinn, Sigurd’s son, and grandson of Malcolm II., is made earl of
      Caithness and Sutherland, i. 389, 401;
   bishopric of, ii. 382;
   earldom of, iii. 8, 71;
   historical account of the earldom and earls of, 448-53.
 Calathros (Calatrii, Catraeth), battles in, i. 247, 291;
   district of, 247, 256, 424.
 Caledones, or Caledonii, a section of the Picts, i. 94, 99,
    100, 127, 130;
   account of, by Tacitus, ᚬv1 58-60ᚬ;
   their territory, as given by Ptolemy, 75, 76;
   join with the Mæatæ in hostilities against the Roman province, ᚬv1
      80ᚬ;
   campaign of Severus, ᚬv1 82-89ᚬ;
   characteristics of these ancient tribes, 83.
 Caledonia, the term by which that portion of Scotland north of the
    Forth and Clyde was known to the Romans, i. 1, 40, ᚬv1
    41ᚬ.
 Caledonian Forest, the (Sylvia Caledonia), i. 40, 48.
 Callender (Kalentyr), on the Carron, thanage of, iii. 277-8.
 Calps paid by native-men, iii. 318;
   abolition of, 368.
 Calphurnius Agricola, sent to Britain, i. 79.
 Cambuskenneth, chartulary of, i. 424.
 Cameron clan and its septs, iii. 313, 315, 331, 350, 479.
 Camlann, battle of, i. 154.
 Campbells, the first on record (Gillespic), iii. 79;
   the clan, 330, 350, 458;
   the Clann Mhic Cailin, 121, 339.
 Canaul (Conall), son of Tarla (Taidg), king of the Picts, i. 302.
 Candida Casa, church at, built by St. Ninian, i. 130, 188;
    ii. 3, ᚬv2 46-49ᚬ, 222, 225.
   _See_ Whithern.
 Canna, isle of, iii. 434.
 Canons-regular (the black canons) of St. Augustine, introduced, ii. ᚬv2
    374ᚬ;
   secular canons instituted, 241.
 Canteæ or Decantæ, a northern tribe, i. 76.
 Cantium (Kent), promontory of, i. 31.
 Caractacus, a British chief, i. 37.
 Caradoc of Llancarvan, i. 405.
 Carausius, reign of, in Britain, i. ᚬv1 91-93ᚬ, 95, 129.
 Carbantorigum (in Kirkcudbright), a town of the Selgovæ, i. 72,
    217.
 Carham, battle of (A.D. 1018), i. 393.
 Carlisle (Caer Luel), i. 236, 271; iii. 81.
 Carlowrie, i. 325.
 Carmichael, Alex., on the townships in the Outer Hebrides, iii. 378-93.
 Carnones, a tribe of N. Britain, i. 76.
 Carriber (Cnuicc Coirpri), battle at, i. 291.
 Carrick, the name, iii. 102;
   earldom of, 70.
 Carron (Cære), river, i. ᚬv1 249-50ᚬ, 270, 290, 424.
 Carstairs, Roman remains at, i. 73.
 Cartismandua, queen of the Brigantes, i. 37.
 Carucates (ploughgates), defined, iii. 224, 225.
 Cassiterides (Tin Islands), name by which the British Islands were
    known to Herodotus, i. 29;
   inhabitants of, 165 _seq_., 226.
 Cat Bregion (Edinburgh), i. 153.
 Catgabail (Catgublaun, Catguollaun), king of Guenedotia, i. 246.
 Cathbad, three daughters of, iii. 128.
 Cathbath, Cinel, a subdivision of the tribe of Loarn, i. 230.
 Cathbuaidh, the crozier of St. Columba, used as a standard in battle,
    i. 339, 348.
 Cathmail, the name, i. ᚬv1 291-2ᚬ.
 Catlon, king of the Britons, slain, i. 245.
 Catraeth. _See_ Calathros.
 Catrail, rampart of the, i. 235.
 Catscaul (Cad-ys-gual), battle of, near Hexham (A.D. 634) between
    Osuald and the king of the Britons [Catlon?], i. ᚬv1 245-6ᚬ.
 Cawdor, thanage of, iii. 248.
 _Ceile De_. _See_ Anchorites.
 Ceile or tenants, iii. 144 _seq_.
 Celidon (Coit), the Caledonian wood, i. 153.
 Cellach, son of Aillel, abbot of Kildare and Iona (A.D. 865), ii. ᚬv2
    291ᚬ, 308, 433.
 Cellach, first bishop of St. Andrews (_c_. A.D. 906) holds with
    Constantin, son of Aedh, a solemn assembly on the Mote Hill of
    Scone: its bearing on the rights and liberties of the Church, i. ᚬv1
    340ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2 323-4ᚬ.
 Celnius, river (Devern), i. 67;
   (Cullen), 216.
 Celtic church. _See_ Church, Scottish.
 Celtic earldoms, break-up of the:
   Moray, iii. 287;
   Buchan, 287;
   Athole, 288;
   Angus, 289;
   Menteath and Stratherne, 290;
   Mar, 291;
   Ross, 291;
   Lennox, 300.
   _See_ Earldoms, Provinces.
 Celtic language, the two branches of the British and Gadhelic, i. ᚬv1
    193ᚬ, 194, 226;
   comparison of its different dialects, 204 _seq_.; ii. ᚬv2
      448-60ᚬ.
   _See_ Languages, Topography.
 Celtic population, early traditionary origins of, as given in the
    ethnic legends, iii. 91-96;
   linguistic, 96;
   historical, 97;
   Cymric, 100;
   Pictish, 107.
   _See_ Highlands.
 Cendaeladh, a Pictish king, i. 137.
 Cennanus. _See_ Kells.
 Ceolfrid, abbot of Jarrow, his correspondence with Nectan, king of the
    Picts, as to the time of celebrating Easter, i. ᚬv1 278-9ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2
    172ᚬ.
 Ceoluulf, king of Northumbria, i. 275, 291.
 Challow (Coll), Laird of, iii. 434, 436.
 Chalmers, George, remarks on his _Caledonia_, i. 19, 48, ᚬv1
    73ᚬ, 77, 87, 140, 196;
   error as to the colonisation of Galloway by the Irish Cruithne, ᚬv1
      132ᚬ;
   also as to Girig, son of Dungaile, 330;
   his objections to the genuineness of certain letters-patent said to
      be granted to the earl of Mar (A.D. 1171), iii. 442.
 Chariots used in war by the Caledonians, i. 55, 83.
 Chattan clan and its septs, sketch of, iii. 313, 315, 330, 478.
 Chester, i. 81, 107, 382.
 Cheviot hills, i. 7, 9; iii. 135.
 Chorischia, a part of Scotland overrun by the Chorischii, i. 182,
    183.
 Christianity: introduced into Scotland through two different
    channels—Roman and Columban, the Southern Picts and the Strathclyde
    Britons (through St. Ninian and St. Kentigern) adhering to the
    first, and the Northern Picts (through Columba) to the second, i.
    130, 132, 142; ii. 26 _seq_. (_see also_
    Whithorn, Columba, Picts);
   the churches derived from each different in character and in spirit,
      i. 258 _seq_., 275; ii. 8, 150 _seq_., ᚬv2
      207-225ᚬ, ᚬv2 344-50ᚬ.
 Church, the, in Britain, during the Roman occupation, ii. 1, ᚬv2
    2ᚬ;
   St. Ninian and his church of Candida Casa, 2, 3 (_see_
      Whithorn);
   the Pelagian heresy, 4;
   mission of Palladius to Ireland, 5;
   mission of Columbanus to Gaul, ᚬv2 6-12ᚬ;
   controversy as to Easter, 7;
   in the sixth century no question of ecclesiastical supremacy had
      arisen, 6;
   three orders of Saints in early Irish Church, ᚬv2 12-14ᚬ:
   church of St. Patrick, ᚬv2 14-24ᚬ;
   collegiate churches of Seven Bishops, ᚬv2 24-26ᚬ;
   life and labours of St. Palladius, 26 _seq_.;
   confusion of Fordun’s statements regarding him, _ib_.;
   St. Ternan, ᚬv2 30-32ᚬ;
   church of the Southern Picts, ᚬv2 26-33ᚬ;
   early Dalriadic church, ᚬv2 33-35ᚬ;
   church south of the Forth and Clyde, 35, 36;
   legend of St. Monenna, 37;
   relapse into paganism of the churches of Ninian and Patrick, 39,
      40.
 Church, monastic, in Ireland, its constitution, ii. 41;
   whence was it derived?, ᚬv2 45-50ᚬ;
   the school of Clonard, 50;
   St. Patrick and the twelve Apostles of Ireland, 51;
   Columba one of the twelve (_see_ Columba);
   influence of the church, 73;
   learning of the, 419;
   hagiology, 425;
   the right of the church from the tribe, and of the tribe from the
      church, 71, 72.
 Church, monastic, in Iona,—monastery founded by Columba (A.D. 563), ii.
    88;
   its constitution, 101;
   affected in opposite ways by the secular clergy and the Culdees, ᚬv2
      227ᚬ, 233 _seq_.;
   its influence as a school of learning, 421;
   schism in, after Adamnan’s death, 175, ᚬv2 278-288ᚬ;
   table of rival abbots, 288.
   _See_ Columba, Coärbs.
 Church of Cumbria and Lothian, ii. 35, 36, ᚬv2 179-224ᚬ
    (_see_ Kentigern, Cuthbert);
   conversion of the Angles, 198;
   Strathclyde Britons conform to Rome, 219;
   chapels founded at Hexham, 220;
   bishopric of Whithern, 224.
 Church of Northumbria, an offshoot of the Columban Church, i. 258;
    ii. ᚬv2 154-9ᚬ;
   points of dispute with the Southern Anglic Church submitted to a
      council in Whitby, i. ᚬv1 258-9ᚬ; ii. 165;
   termination of, ᚬv2 164-6ᚬ.
 Church, the Scottish:—first appearance of this name (A.D. 878), i. ᚬv1
    333ᚬ; ii. 320;
   coincident with the change from ‘kingdom of the Picts’ to ‘kingdom of
      Alban,’ i. ᚬv1 333-35ᚬ, 384; ii. 323;
   primacy transferred to St. Andrews, 323;
   canonical rule of the Culdees introduced, 324;
   lay abbots of Dunkeld, 337;
   hereditary succession in benefices, 338;
   laymen and their heirs hold church offices, 338;
   Queen Margaret’s reforms in the church, 344;
   she rebuilds the monastery of Iona, 352;
   Anchorites at this time, 351;
   bishops of Alban, ᚬv2 323-44ᚬ;
   decadence and ultimate extinction of this old Celtic church, ᚬv2
      354-65ᚬ;
   its failure in diocese of Brechin, 400;
   of Dunblane, 402;
   of Dunkeld, 405;
   disappearance of the Celtic community of Iona, 412,
     and a Benedictine abbey and nunnery founded (A.D. 1203), 415;
   remains of old Celtic church, 417;
   its hagiology, 444 _seq_.
 Cillemuine (St. Davids), i. 388.
 Cinaeth, king of the Picts, i. 242.
 Ciniod, son of Wredech, king of the Picts, i. ᚬv1 300-1ᚬ.
 Circinn (Maghcircin, Magh Gherginn = Mearns), i. 185, 186,
    365;
   battle at, between the Picts themselves, 295; iii. 123.
   _See_ Moerne.
 Ciricus, St., day of, i. 330.
 Clach na Breatan = stone of the Britons, in Glenfalloch, probably the
    scene of the conflict between the Dalriads and Britons (A.D. 717),
    i. ᚬv1 273-4ᚬ.
 Clan, signification of the word, iii. 331;
   patronymics, personal names, and surnames, 331-4;
   original importance and position of Clan pedigrees, 334;
   changes produced by legendary history, 336,
     and by Irish sennachies, 337;
   also by Act of 1597, 346-9;
   modern position of a Clan, as defined in the Supreme Court, 366-67.
 Clans: localities, possessions, and legendary descent [all in vol.
    iii.]:
   Alaster (MacAlasters), 330, 410, 468.
   Andres (Rosses), 330, 365, 484.
   Cameron, 331, 350, 479.
   Chattan, 330, 478.
   Clanranald (Macdonalds of Kippoch), 330, 430 _seq_., 469.
   Donnachie (Robertsons), 330, 365, 401.
   Donald, 330, 430 _seq_., 466.
   Dubhgal (Macdougalls), 330, 470.
   Dubhsithe (Macduffie), 331, 363, 486.
   Eoin Mor (MacConnells), 330, 401, 432, 469.
   Eoin of Ardnamurchan, 401, 469.
   Eoin of Glencomhan (Glencoe), 401, 430.
   Fingaine (MacKinnons), 331, 363, 365, 488.
   Gillechallam of Raarsa, 433.
   Gilleoin (Macleans), 331, 480.
   Gregor (MacGregor), 329, 331, 365. 487.
   Guaire (Macquarries), 331, 436, 488.
   Gunn, 330.
   Hustain (MacDonalds of Slate), 330.
   Ian (MacIans), 330.
   Kenneth (Mackenzies), 330, 365, 485.
   Labhran (Lawren), 329, 363, 365, 483.
   Lachlan, 331, 473.
   Ladmann (Lamont), 331, 472.
   Leod (Macleods), 331, 429, 460.
   Macduff, 303.
   Mackinnons, 363, 488.
   MacNab, 362-3, 365, 486.
   M‘Thomas, 330.
   Mathesons, 365, 485.
   Morgan (Mackays), 330.
   Neachtan (MacNaughton), 331, 477.
   Neill (MacNeill), 331, 430.
   O’Duibhn (Campbells), 330, 458.
   Pharlane, 329, 365.
   Vuirich, 364.
 Clanranald, Book of, quoted, iii. 49, 338;
   portion of, translated, 397.
 Clanranald, clan (Macdonalds of Kippoch), iii. 119, 330, 430 _seq_.,
    469.
 Claudian, Roman poet, his allusions to events in Britain, i. 100,
    105, 106, 139.
 Claudius, the Emperor, formation of a Roman province in Britain in his
    reign, i. 33, 34.
 Cleaven Dyke, Roman vallum in Perthshire so called, i. ᚬv1 52-54ᚬ.
 Cleveland, i. 369, 421.
 Clonard, monastic school of, ii. 50.
 Clonmacnoise, _Annals of_, i. 356, 359.
 Cloveth (Clova), thanage of, iii. 263.
 Cluantarbh, battle at (_see_ Brian Boroimhe);
   auxiliary Galls at, i. ᚬv1 387-8ᚬ.
 Cluny (Cluanan), Danes advance to, i. 311.
 Clyde (Clota), estuary of Clyde, i. 66, 216, _et al_.
 Cnuicc Cairpri. _See_ Carriber.
 Cnut, king of England, i. 392, 395.
 Coamatra, isle of, iii. 436.
 Coärb (Comharba), the term defined, ii. 286;
   applied to abbots of Columban monasteries, 285, 413;
   the successors of Columba so termed after the schism in Iona ceased,
      Breasal being the first Coärb (A.D. 772-801), 288;
   his successors till St. Columba’s shrine and relics were removed to
      Ireland, and the primacy transferred to Abernethy, ᚬv2 290-319ᚬ.
 Cocboy (called by Bede Maserfelth), battle of (A.D. 642), i. 252.
 Cockburnspath (Colbrandspath), i. 241.
 Coede, bishop of Iona, ii. 175.
 Colania, a town of the Damnonii, i. 73.
 Coldingham, monastery of, founded (A.D. 627), ii. 200;
   refounded (A.D. 1093), i. 444; ii. 367.
 Coll (Collow), island of, iii. 30, 36, 436.
 Colla, race of, iii. 113.
 Colla Uais, son of Eochaidh Duibhlen, king of Ireland, iii. 340, 397;
   his descendants, 398.
 Colla-dha-Chrioch, son of Eochaidh Duibhlen, iii. 397, 398.
 Colla Meann, son of Eochaidh Duibhlen, iii. 397, 398.
 Collas, legend of the three, iii. 462.
 Colly (Cowie), thanage of, iii. 257.
 Colman, bishop of Lindisfarne, i. ᚬv1 258-9ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2 165-168ᚬ.
 Colman (Mocholmoc) of Dromore, ii. 32.
 Colonsay (Collonsa, Koln), island of, i. 379; iii. 438;
   laird of, 438.
 Colsmon, isle of, iii. 431.
 Columba, St., labours (A.D. 565) among the Northern Picts, i. ᚬv1
    130-7ᚬ, ᚬv1 142-3ᚬ, 198, 200, 276;
   his crozier used as a standard in battle, 339, 348;
   one of the Twelve Apostles of Ireland, ii. 52;
   descent and early life, 52;
   founds the monastery of Derry, 53,
     and many other foundations, ᚬv2 54-55ᚬ;
   connection of his mission to Britain with the battle of Culdremhne,
      ᚬv2 78-84ᚬ;
   crosses from Ireland to Britain with twelve followers, 85;
   resides with Conall, king of Dalriada, 85,
     who gives him the island of Iona, 87;
   on which he founds a monastery, 88;
   establishes his church there, 93;
   its characteristics, ᚬv2 93-95ᚬ,
     and constitution, ᚬv2 101-104ᚬ;
   site of the original wooden monastery and its surroundings, ᚬv2
      95-101ᚬ;
   influence of Columba on the adjacent districts, 104;
   conversion of King Brude, ᚬv2 105-107ᚬ;
   his labours among the Northern Picts, ᚬv2 119-121ᚬ;
   ordains Aidan king of the Dalriadic territories, 122;
   attends the Assembly of Drumceatt, near Derry, 123;
   his purposes thereat, 124;
   twelve years’ work summed up, 127;
   monasteries founded by himself and others in the Western Isles, ᚬv2
      128-134ᚬ;
   among the Northern and Southern Picts, ᚬv2 134-138ᚬ;
   his visit to Ireland, 138;
   last days of his life, ᚬv2 138-143ᚬ;
   his character, ᚬv2 143-147ᚬ;
   his successors in the primacy of Iona, ᚬv2 148-177ᚬ;
   expulsion of the Columban monks from the kingdom of the Picts (A.D.
      717),
     and close of the influence of the ‘Family of Iona,’ i. ᚬv1 283-4ᚬ,
        ᚬv1 315-6ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2 177-178ᚬ;
   legends which seem to be connected with their return, i. ᚬv1 319-20ᚬ;
   his remains enshrined, ii. 291;
   a cell or oratory built for their reception, 303;
   his relics, or part thereof, removed to Dunkeld, 307;
   shrine and relics removed to Ireland, 317;
   restored to Iona, 318;
   transferred to Down, 332;
   a discourse on his life and character, 467;
   rule of, 508.
   _See_ Iona, Coärbs.
 Columbanus, St., his mission to Gaul (A.D. 590), ii. ᚬv2 6-11ᚬ, ᚬv2
    41ᚬ.
 Comet of the year 1018, i. 393.
 Comgall, son of Domangart, king of Dalriada, i. 141, 142, ᚬv1
    229ᚬ;
   tribe of, incorporated with the Cinel Gabhran, 230.
 Comines, Earl Robert de, i. 419, 425.
 Commodus, Emperor, i. 79.
 Comrie, Roman camp at Dealgan Ross, i. 45, 50.
 Comyn (Cumyn), John, of Badenoch, iii. 81, 82.
 Comyn, Walter, Earl of Menteath, iii. 77, 80.
 Comyns, Earls of Buchan, iii. 71, 72, 242.
 Conadh Cerr, king of Dalriada, i. 241.
 Conaing, son of Aidan, i. 273, 285.
 Conall, son of Comgall, king of Dalriada, i. 142, 321; ii.
    85; iii. 211.
 Conall, son of Taidg. _See_ Canaul.
 Conall Crandamna, brother of Domnall Breac, king of Dalriada, i. ᚬv1
    272ᚬ.
 Conall, son of Aedain, slays Conall, son of Taidg, i. 302, ᚬv1
    374ᚬ.
 Conan, river, i. 320.
 Congal Claen. _See_ Magh Rath.
 Conmael, abbot of Iona, ii. 175.
 Conn of the hundred battles, iii. 110.
 Constantin (789-820), son of Fergus, king of the Picts, i. 302,
    ᚬv1 307-8ᚬ.
 Constantin (863-76), son of Kenneth mac Alpin, king of the Picts, i.
    ᚬv1 323-28ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2 310-13ᚬ.
 Constantin (900-942), son of Aedh, king of Alban, i. 339 _seq_.;
   invasion of Northmen, 339;
   holds, with Cellach bishop of Kilrymont, a solemn assembly on the
      Mote Hill of Scone, 340;
   division of Alban at this time into seven provinces, 340 _seq_.
      (_see_ Provinces);
   invasion of Aethelstan, 352;
   takes part in the battle of Brunanburg, 353;
   resigns the throne, and retires to the monastery of St. Andrews, ᚬv1
      360ᚬ;
   his death, 360.
 Constantin (995-97), son of Cuilean, king of Alban, slain by Kenneth,
    son of Malcolm, i. ᚬv1 381-2ᚬ.
 Constantine, son of Constantius Chlorus, becomes Emperor, i. 95.
 Constantine, Emperor, account of his usurpation, i. ᚬv1 108-112ᚬ;
   his son Constans, 110.
 Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, recovers Britain from the usurpation of
    Carausius, i. 93;
   his war against the Caledonians and other Picts, 94;
   his death at York, 95.
 Conveth. _See_ Cain.
 Conveth (Conuath), thanage of, in Banffshire, iii. 252.
 Coolin hills, iii. 128.
 Corda, a town of the Selgovæ, i. 72.
 Coria (Carstairs), a town of the Damnonii, i. 73.
 _Cormac’s Glossary_, iii. 131
 Cornac (Cornar, Curnig), river, i. 368.
 Cornwall, the tin-workers of, representatives of the Iberians who
    preceded the Celts in Britain, i. ᚬv1 165-170ᚬ, 226.
 Corca Laidhe, genealogy of, iii. 211.
 Coronation stone of Scone, i. ᚬv1 281-3ᚬ.
 Cowall, district of, visited by Agricola, i. 47, 48;
   the name derived from Comgall, 229, 230, 321.
 Cranach, thanage of, iii. 86, 272.
 Craniology, ethnological evidence furnished by, i. ᚬv1 169-70ᚬ, ᚬv1
    226ᚬ.
 Creic, in Dalriada, burnt by Angus, i. 290.
 Creones, Croenes, a tribe of North Britain, i. 76.
 Crimthan Mor mac Fidhaig, iii. 114, 124
 Crinan (Cronan), lay abbot of Dunkeld, i. ᚬv1 390-2ᚬ;
   called Crinan Tein, or the thane, 394;
   also the Hound Earl, 401;
   his sons Duncan and Maldred, 392, 394, 408, 419;
   slain, 407.
 Crinan, bay of, i. 229.
 Crofters and cottars, iii. 375 _seq_.
 _Cromartie, Earls of_, Sir W. Fraser’s, iii. 351 _seq_.
 Cromdale, thanage of, iii. 249.
 Crown demesne, species of tenure, iii. 84-88;
   Crown lands, ranks of society on, 238-44.
 Cruithintuath, the Irish equivalent of Pictavia, i. 315, 324,
    384.
 Cruithne and his seven sons, i. 185, 186, 231, 295;
    iii. 97, 107.
 Cruithnigh, the, a Pictish people in the north of Ireland, i. 131,
    ᚬv1 142-3ᚬ, 226;
   Irish traditions regarding, 175; iii. 96.;
   battles with the Dalriads, i. 241;
   close connection in the popular tales between them and the Pictish
      inhabitants of North Britain, iii. 131.
 Cuddiche (a night’s portion), a land-burden, iii. 233.
 Cuilean, son of Indulph, king of Alban, defeated at Drumcrub, i. ᚬv1
    367ᚬ;
   slain in Laodonia (Lothian) by Andarch, ᚬv1 367-8ᚬ.
 Culdees, first appearance of the name, in beginning of the eighth
    century, ii. 226;
   conclusions as to their origin, 277.
   _See_ Anchorites.
 Culdremhne, battle of, ii. 80.
 Culrenrigi, island of, plundered, i. ᚬv1 289-90ᚬ.
 Cumbria, evangelised by Kentigern (A.D. 573), (_see_ Kentigern) and his
    successors, ii. 179 _seq_., 198;
   ceded to the Scots by king Eadmund (A.D. 945), i. 362;
   Malcolm (Ceannmor) put in possession of it by Earl Siward, ᚬv1
      408-10ᚬ;
   name of, restricted, iii. 4.
 Cumherbes and Cumlawes, iii. 26;
   meaning of, 223.
 Cummen the Fair, abbot of Iona, i. 247.
 Cumuscach, son of Aengus, slain, i. 246.
 Cupar-Angus (Cubert), Roman camp at, i. 49; iii. 133;
   thanage of, 133, 275.
 Curia, town of (Carby Hill, in Liddesdale), i. 71.
 Curnavii, a northern tribe, i. 76.
 Cuthbert, St. (Cudberct), Bede’s Life of, ii. 201;
   Irish Life of, 203;
   in Melrose monastery, 206;
   becomes prior there, 208;
   goes to Lindisfarne, 209;
   withdraws to Farne island, 211;
   consecrated bishop of Lindisfarne, 213;
   retirement to Farne, 214;
   his death, 214;
   his relics enshrined, 218.
 Cymric legends, iii. 100-104.

 Dacia. _See_ Norwegia.
 Dalaraidhe (Dalaradia), a district (called also Vladh) in the north of
    Ireland, inhabited by a Pictish people, i. 131, 198.
 Dalfin, archbishop of Gaul, i. 259.
 Dalguise, probably where the battle of Seguise was fought in A.D. 635,
    i. 246.
 Dali, district of, i. ᚬv1 375-6ᚬ, 390, 412.
   _See_ Arregaithel.
 Dalmonych (Dalmarnoch), thanage of, iii. 274.
 Dalriada, a district in the north-east of Ireland, i. 140 _seq_.;
   the name given to the settlement of the Scots in Argyll, 139
      _seq_., 248;
   Dalriadic ethnologic legend, 183, 184;
   Scottish kingdom of, ᚬv1 229-30ᚬ;
   battles between the Dalriads and the Cruithnigh, 241, 242;
   anarchy in, after Domnall Brec’s death, 250, 251, 272;
   Dalriads fall under the dominion of the Angles for thirty years, ᚬv1
      256ᚬ _seq_.;
   after several unsuccessful attempts to throw off the yoke, 264,
     Ecgfrid is defeated and slain at Dunnichen, 265, 267;
   contest between the two chief tribes for the throne, ᚬv1 272-3ᚬ, ᚬv1
      284-6ᚬ;
   conflicts with the Britons, ᚬv1 273-4ᚬ;
   revolution, and renewed contest, 286, 289;
   the country laid waste by Angus, king of the Picts, 290;
   Dalriadic defeat at Carriber, 291;
   the Dalriads crushed by Angus (A.D. 741), 292, 315:
   lists of kings for the following century not trustworthy, owing to
      the perversions of the Chronicles, 292 _seq_.;
   notices of the Scots of Dalriada till the time of Kenneth mac Alpin,
      316 _seq_.;
   attacked by the Danes, 377;
   early church of, ii. 33;
   tribes of, iii. 212.
   _See_ Drumceat, Picts.
 Dam Hoctor, settlement of the, in Gwyned, i. 138.
 Damnonii, tribes of the (the ‘novæ gentes’), and their territory and
    towns, i. 73, 74, 127, 128, 155, 167,
    211, 231.
 Danes, their first appearance on our coasts, i. 302 _seq_.; ii.
    18 (_see_ Galls);
   naval attack on Ireland, i. 307;
   the men of Fortrenn defeated by the Danes, ᚬv1 307-308ᚬ;
   a band under Halfdan lay waste Northumbria, and destroy the Picts of
      Galloway and the Britons of Strathclyde, ᚬv1 325-6ᚬ;
   conflict with Norwegians, 327:
   again attack Northumbria, 332;
   plunder Ireland, 338;
   invade Alban, ᚬv1 338-9ᚬ, ᚬv1 347-8ᚬ;
   final conflict with the native tribes of Ireland, ᚬv1 386-88ᚬ.
 Darlugdach, abbess of Kildare, i. 135.
 Dasent’s _Burnt Njal_, i. 379, 388.
 Dathi, the, iii. 115, 122.
 Davach, definition of, iii. 224.
   _See_ Land-measures.
 Daven, loch, i. 74.
 David I., youngest son of Malcolm Ceannmor, marries Matilda, heiress of
    Huntingdon, i. 454;
   rules the provinces south of the Firths, as Earl, for seventeen years
      (A.D. 1107-1124), ᚬv1 454-57ᚬ;
   various foundations, grants, and charters by, 455 _seq_.;
   reigns over Scotland as first feudal monarch (A.D. 1124-53), ᚬv1
      457ᚬ;
   defeats an insurrection headed by the Earl of Moray, and Malcolm, a
      natural son of Alexander I., 460;
   defeats Malcolm mac Eth, ᚬv1 462-464ᚬ;
   invades England in support of his niece, Matilda, 465;
   heterogeneous composition of his army, 467;
   death of his only son, 468;
   his own death, 468;
   bishoprics and monasteries founded by, ii. 376;
   feudalises Celtic earldoms, iii. 63.
 Davis, Sir John, letter by, relative to Monaghan and Fermanagh (A.D.
    1606), iii. 165, 170, 196.
 Dawstone. _See_ Degsastane.
 Dawkins, W. Boyd, on the sepulchral remains of Britain, i. ᚬv1 169-70ᚬ.
 Deabhra, loch, i. 411.
 Debateable lands, their three divisions: (1) from the Tay to the Forth;
    (2) between the Forth and the Carron; (3) from the Carron to the
    Pentlands and the Esk,—the latter being the main battle-field of
    contending races, and eventually included in the kingdom of the
    Scots (_see_ Lothian), i. 14, 15, 237.
 Deer, Book of, ii. 380;
   contents, 458; iii. 55 _seq_., 212.
 Deer forests, iii. 371.
 Degsastane (Dawstone), battle of, i. 162, 163, 239, ᚬv1
    267ᚬ.
 _Deicolæ._ _See_ Anchorites, Culdees.
 Deira, Anglic kingdom of, i. 156, ᚬv1 236-237ᚬ;
   united with Bernicia, 252, 331;
   overrun by the Danes, 325, 351;
   Sitriuc, its Danish king, meets with Aethelstan, who seizes Deira on
      his death, 351.
 Delgon, in Kintyre, i. 142.
 _Deoraidh De._ _See_ Anchorites.
 Dervesin (Dairsie), thanage of, iii. 268.
 Derwent, river, i. 271.
 _Descent of Men of the North_, quoted from, iii. 102.
 Deucaledonian Sea of Ptolemy, i. 70.
 Deva (Chester), i. 81.
 Deva, river (Dee, Ayrshire), i. 66, 216.
 Devana, a town of the Taexali, i. 74.
 Devisesburn, i. ᚬv1 244-5ᚬ.
 Diarmaid, abbot of Iona (814-31), brings from Ireland the relics of St.
    Columba, ii. 297, 303;
   returns thither with them, ᚬv2 305-6ᚬ.
 Dicalidonæ, a division of the Picts, i. 99, 100, 129.
 Dinguardi. _See_ Bamborough.
 Dingwall, thanage of, iii. 247.
 Diocletian, Emperor, i. ᚬv1 92-94ᚬ.
 Diodorus Siculus, i. ᚬv1 31-33ᚬ.
 Doldencha, lake (in Braemar), i. 298.
   _See_ Kindrochet.
 Dollar, conflict between the Danes and Scots at, i. 327.
 Domhnall of Ile (Isla), son of Eoin, sketch of his career, iii. 403-4;
   death of his son, bishop of Innsigall, 408;
   his descendants, 408.
 Domhnall Dubh, son of Aonghus Og (heir of Eoin), his tribe almost
    exterminated during his minority and imprisonment, iii. 404;
   unsuccessful attempt to regain his possessions, 406.
 Domitian, the Emperor, i. 57, 58.
 Domnall Breac, king of Dalriada, i. 242;
   defeated at Calathros, 247,
     and at Glenmairison, 249;
   slain in Strathcarron, ᚬv1 249-51ᚬ, 271.
 Domnall Donn, nephew of Domnall Breac, i. 272.
 Domnall mac Avin, king of Alclyde, i. 271.
 Don, river. _See_ Antona.
 Donald mac Alpin, succeeds his brother Kenneth as king of the Picts, i.
    ᚬv1 322-3ᚬ.
 Donald, son of Constantin, and grandson of Kenneth mac Alpin, first
    king of Alban, i. 335;
   slain at Dunnottar, ᚬv1 338-9ᚬ.
 Donald, son of Aedh, king of Alban, elected king of the Cumbrian
    Britons, i. 346.
 Donald, son of Eimin, mormaer of Mar, slain, i. ᚬv1 387-8ᚬ.
 Donald (Dunwallaun, Domnall), son of Eugenius, king of the Cumbrians,
    i. 362;
   death of his son Malcolm, ᚬv1 381-2ᚬ.
 Donald Ban, brother of Malcolm Ceannmor, reigns six months (A.D. 1093),
    i. 436;
   again, with his nephew, three years, 439;
   dies at Rescobie, and is buried in Dunfermline, 440.
 Donald Ban Mac William. _See_ Mac William.
 Donald (Mac Donald), clan, iii. 119, 330, 430 _seq_., 466.
   _See_ Hustain.
 Donnachie (Robertsons), clan, iii. 330, 361, 365, 401.
 Donnan, St., of Egg, i. 345.
 Donnchadh, king of Cashel, i. 338.
 Dorbeni, abbot of Iona, ii. 175.
 Dornoch Firth, i. 337.
 Dorsum Britanniæ. _See_ Drumalban.
 Douglas (Dubglas) river, Arthur’s battles on the, i. 153.
 Doune. _See_ Glendowachy.
 Drest, son of Talorgen, king of the Picts, i. 301.
 Drest, son of Constantin, joint king of the Picts with Talorgan, son of
    Wthoil, i. 306.
 Drest, son of Ferat, king of the Picts, i. 309.
 Droma, loch, i. 319.
 Drost, son of Domnall, king of the Picts, driven from his kingdom, i.
    ᚬv1 262-3ᚬ.
 Drum, the name of, i. 13.
 Drumalban, a mountain chain, from Dumbartonshire to the Ord of
    Caithness, i. ᚬv1 10-14ᚬ, 75, 228;
   errors regarding, 12.
 Drum Cathmail, battle at, between the Picts of Galloway and the Scots
    of Dalriada, i. ᚬv1 291-2ᚬ.
 Drumceat, Council of, at which the independence of Dalriada was
    recognised (A.D. 575), i. 143, 235, 248; iii. 122.
 Drumcrub, battle at, i. 367.
 Drust (Drest), several Pictish kings so called, i. 134 _seq_.
 Drust (Druxst), king of the Picts after Nectan, i. 284;
   slain, 289.
 Dubglas, river. _See_ Douglas.
 Dubh, son of Malcolm, king of Alban, i. ᚬv1 366-67ᚬ.
 Dubhgal (Macdougalls), clan, iii. 119, 330, 470.
 Dubhgall, son of Somerled, iii. 35, 39, 293, 400.
 Dubhgaill. _See_ Galls.
 Dubhsithe (Macduffie), clan, iii. 331, 363, 466.
 Dublin. _See_ Ireland.
 Dufoter de Calateria, i. 424.
 Duinbrunde. _See_ Brunanburg.
 Dull, monastery of, ii. 175, ᚬv2 206-7ᚬ;
   abthanrie and church of, iii. 271.
 Dulmonych, thanage of, iii. 274.
 Dumbarton (Dumbreatan), capital of the kingdom of the Britons of
    Alclyde, i. 236.
 Dunadd, a fortified hill in the moss of Crinan, called also Dunmonaidh
    (the capital of Dalriada), i. 229, 230;
   siege of, 264;
   taken possession of by Angus, 290.
 Dunaverty (Aberte), siege of, i. 273.
 Dunbar, i. 425;
   the name, ii. v2;
   Castle of, iii. 82.
 Dunbeath (Dunbaitte), siege of, i. 263.
 Dunblane, burnt by the Britons, i. 310;
   ravaged by the Danes, 347;
   bishopric of, ii. ᚬv2 395-398ᚬ;
   the name, v2
 Duncadh, abbot of Iona, ii. 175.
 Duncan mac Duine, ancestor of the Campbells, iii. 79.
 Duncan, son of Crinan (Cronan), king of Scotia, i. 392, ᚬv1
    399-405ᚬ.
   _See_ Kali Hundason.
 Duncan, son of Malcolm Ceannmor, i. 414, 425;
   his reign (A.D. 1093-4), ᚬv1 437-39ᚬ.
 Duncan, abbot of Dunkeld, i. 367.
 Duncan (Dungadr), jarl of Caithness, i. 374.
 Duncath fort, i. 382.
 Dunchadh, son of Becc, i. 285.
 Dunduirn (Dundurn), a fortification on the Earn, besieged, i. 264;
   Grig slain at, 330.
 Dunedin. _See_ Edinburgh.
 Dunfhirbolg, a native fort in St. Kilda, i. 185.
 Dunfres (Dumfries), the town of the Frisians, iii. 25.
 Dungal, son of Sealbach, king of Dalriada, i. ᚬv1 284-5ᚬ;
   driven from the throne, 286;
   is restored, 289;
   invades Culrenrigi, incurs the wrath of Angus, and takes refuge in
      Ireland, ᚬv1 289-90ᚬ;
   is put in chains, 290.
 Dungallsbae (Duncansbay), i. 401.
 Dungayle, in Galloway, i. 292.
   _See_ Drum Cathmail.
 Dun Guaire, a name of Bamborough, i. ᚬv1 373-4ᚬ.
 Dunine (Dunning), thanage of, iii. 87, 269.
 Dunkeld, church of, founded by Constantin, king of the Picts, i. ᚬv1
    305ᚬ, 315;
   a portion of St. Columba’s relics transferred to, 310, 316;
   abbot of (Duncan), 367, 392;
   lay abbots of, ii. 337;
   bishopric of, 368;
   position of, 376.
   _See_ Crinan.
 Dun Leithfinn, a fort, destroyed by Angus, i. 290.
 Dunlocho, battle at, i. 264.
 Dunmore hill, i. 75.
 Dunolly (Duin Ollaig), stronghold of the Cinel Loarn, burnt by Ecgfrid,
    i. 266, 272;
   rebuilt by Sealbach, 273.
 Dunnagual (Dungaile), son of Teudubr, i. 296, 325.
 Dunnichen (Dun Nechtan), its connection with Nectan, a Pictish king, i.
    135;
   battle of, in which Ecgfrid was slain (A.D. 686), 265, 266;
      ii. 213.
 Dunnottar (Dunfoither), siege of, i. 263;
   again besieged, 269;
   Donald, first king of Alban, slain at, ᚬv1 338-9ᚬ;
   a stronghold of the men of Moerne, 342;
   Aethelstan’s advance to, 352.
 Dunsforth, the Devil’s Cross at, i. 359.
 Dunsinnan, i. 380.
 Duntroon, iii. 129.
 Dunwallaun (Domnall), son of Eugenius (Owin, Eaoin), king of the
    Cumbrians, i. 362, 370.
 Duny (Downie), thanage of, iii. 267.
 Durham, besieged by Malcolm II., i. 385.
 Durris, thanage of, iii. 257.
 Dyce, what is implied in the territorial name, iii. 282.
 Dyke and Brodie, thanage of, iii. 248.

 Eachach, king of Dalriada, i. 289.
 Eachadh (Eochagh, Eoghan), Cinel, one of the three subdivisions of the
    tribe of Loarn, i. 230, 264, 289.
 Eadberct, king of Northumbria (A.D. 737-58), i. 291;
   extends his dominion over Galloway and all Ayrshire, 294 _seq_.,
      331;
   abdicates, 300.
 Eadberct, bishop of Lindisfarne, ii. 220.
 Eadfrid, son of Aeduin, i. 243.
 Eadgar, son of Eadward Aetheling, i. 414 _seq_.
 Eadgar, son of Malcolm Ceannmor, reigns nine years (A.D. 1097-1107), i.
    440; iii. 215;
   treats with Magnus Barefoot of Norway, i. 442; iii. 9;
   re-founds the monastery of Coldingham, i. 444;
   dies in Edinburgh, 444;
   is buried in Dunfermline, 445.
 Eadmund the Etheling (A.D. 940-46) takes part with his brother against
    the Danes at Brunanburg, i. 353;
   subdues Northumberland, 361;
   cedes Cumbria to the Scots, 362;
   death of, 363.
 Eadmund, son of Malcolm Ceannmor, reigns with his uncle Donald Ban
    three years, i. 439.
 Eadred Ætheling, i. 363.
 Eadulf Cudel, cedes Lothian to the Scots after the battle of Carham, i.
    ᚬv1 392-4ᚬ, 399, 400.
 Eadulf (Yvelchild), earl of Northumbria, i. 369 _seq_.
 Eadward Aetheling, son of king Eadmund, i. 415.
 Eadward, son of Aelfred the Great, discussion as to whether he advanced
    beyond the Humber—doubtful statements of the Saxon Chronicle, i. ᚬv1
    349ᚬ, 350.
 Eadward the Confessor, i. 415.
 Ealdburg. _See_ Aldborough.
 Ealdhun (Aldun), bishop of Durham, i. 385.
 Ealdred, son of Ealdulf, lord of Bamborough, makes peace with
    Aethelstan, i. 351.
 Ealdred, son of Uchtred. _See_ Aldred.
 Eanfrid, son of Aedilfrid, i. 240, 244; ii. 153.
 Earldoms, the old Celtic (_see_ Celtic earldoms);
   additional earldoms created, iii. 66;
   policy of feudalising earldoms, inaugurated by David I., carried out
      by his successor, 67 _seq_.;
   their character and relation to the law of feudal tenure, 72-77.
   _See_ Provinces.
 Earls, first appearance of the title in Scottish history, iii. 58-63;
   the Seven Earls, 59;
   six Celtic earls besiege Malcolm IV. in Perth, 65;
   apparently a constitutional body, 71 _seq_.;
   merged in the Estates of the kingdom, 82.
 Earn, river, i. 220, 261.
 Easter, difference as to the time of celebrating, between the Anglic
    and Columban churches, i. 275 _seq_.; ii. 8, 150
    _seq_.
 Eata, first abbot of Mailros, ii. 200;
   afterwards bishop of Lindisfarne, 206.
 Ebissa. _See_ Octa.
 Ebudæ (Hebrides), islands of the, i. 40, 47;
   easter and wester Ebuda (Isla and Jura), 69.
   _See_ Hebrides, Isles.
 Ecclesbreac. _See_ Falkirk.
 Ecclesgreig, parish of, iii. 261.
 Ecgberct, king of Northumbria (A.D. 867), i. 332.
 Ecgberct, an Anglic priest, i. 264;
   his views regarding Easter adopted by the majority in Iona, ii. ᚬv2
      176ᚬ.
 Ecgfrid, king of Northumbria, i. ᚬv1 260-265ᚬ;
   slain at Dunnichen, 266;
   effect of his defeat, 267 _seq_.
 Ectolairg mac Foith (Talore, son of Wid), i. 257.
   _See_ Garnaid.
 Edderachylis, iii. 462.
 Eddi’s _Life of St. Wilfrid_, i. 260.
 Edevyn (Idvies), thanage of, iii. 265.
 Ediluald, bishop in Lindisfarne, i. 275.
 Edinburgh (Etin, Edwinesburg, Mynyd Agned, Dunedin), i. 240;
   besieged (A.D. 638), 249;
   surrendered, with the district of which it was the stronghold, to the
      Scots, in the reign of Indulph (A.D. 954-62), 365, 372.
   _See_ Aeduin.
 Education of the people, bearing of the Church on, ii. 444;
   a period of nearly 100 years before the Reformation one of neglected
      education, and no learning, in the Highlands, 461.
 Egelwin, Bishop, i. 422.
 Egg, island of, i. 345; ii. 152; iii. 433.
 Eglisgirg (Greg’s church), dedicated to St. Ciricus—a memorial of Grig,
    i. ᚬv1 333-4ᚬ; iii. 261.
 Egremont, the Boy of, his claim to the Scottish throne, iii. 66.
 Eildon (Eldun) hill, near Melrose, contest at, between Ethelwald and
    one of his generals, i. 300.
 Einar, earl of Orkney, i. ᚬv1 344-5ᚬ.
 Einar, son of Sigurd the Stout, i. 388, 401.
 Ekkialsbakki, burial-place of Sigurd, earl of Orkney, i. 366;
   identification of, 337.
 Elder, John, letter from, to Henry VIII., quoted, iii. 331, 337.
 Eldred, lord of Bamborough, unites with Constantin, king of Alban, to
    resist the Danes, i. ᚬv1 347-8ᚬ.
 Elfleda, daughter of Ealdred, Earl of Northumbria, and wife of Siward,
    i. 408.
 Ellan na muk, isle of, iii. 434.
 English possessions of Scottish kings, iii. 5.
 Eobba, father of Ida, who founds the kingdom of Bernicia, i. 155.
 Eocha (Eachdach, Eochaidh), grandson of Domnall Breac, i. 272;
   conflict between his family and Selbach at Ross-Foichen, 286;
   his death, 287.
 Eocha (Eochodius), son of Indulf, slain by the Britons, i. 367.
 Eocha (Eochodius), son of Run, and grandson of Kenneth mac Alpin, king
    of the Picts, associated with Grig, i. ᚬv1 329-30ᚬ, 373.
 Eochadh Buidhe, king of the Picts, i. 241, 242.
 Eochaidh, grandson of Loarn, i. 264.
 Eoganan, son of Angus, rules in Dalriada, i. 305;
   becomes king of the southern Picts, ᚬv1 307-8ᚬ.
 Eoin, son of Aonghus Og, his descendants, iii. 402;
   gives liberally to the church, his death and burial, 402-3.
 Eoin Mor (Mac Connells), clan, iii. 330, 401, 409, 432, 469.
 Eoin of Ardnamurchan, clan, iii. 401, 469.
 Eoin of Glencomhan (Glencoe), iii. 401, 430.
 Eoin of Ile, poem composed on, iii. 407
 Epidii, a tribe occupying Kintyre and Lorn, i. 76, 206.
 Epidium, promontory of (Kintyre), i. 68.
 Epidium, island of (Lismore), i. 69.
 Erc and his sons, founders of the Scots colony in Dalriada, i. ᚬv1
    139ᚬ, 229, 300; ii. 290; iii. 121.
 Eremitical saints, ii. 248.
   _See_ Anchorites.
 Eric Bloody Axe, settled by Aethelstan in Northumberland, i. ᚬv1
    359-60ᚬ;
   is once and again expelled, ᚬv1 363-4ᚬ:
   his sons go to Orkney, whence they make piratical expeditions, ᚬv1
      365-6ᚬ.
 Eric, a Dane, made Earl of Northumbria by Cnut, i. ᚬv1 392-3ᚬ.
 Erin, the Three Sorrowful Stories of (an Irish legend), iii. 127.
 Esk, river (Haddingtonshire), i. 238.
 Essy, in Strathbolgy, i. 411.
 Estates of the Realm in 1283, iii. 39.
 Estuaries of Forth and Clyde, i. 8.
 Ethelred, king of Northumbria (A.D. 774), i. 301.
 Ethelred, king of the English, defeats the Scots (A.D. 1006), i. ᚬv1
    385ᚬ.
 Ethelwald, called Moll, king of Northumbria, i. 300.
 Ethelwulf, king of Wessex, i. 333; ii. 321.
 Ethnology of Britain, i. 164 _seq_.;
   British traditions, 171;
   Irish traditions, 172;
   Dalriadic legend, 183;
   Pictish legends, 185;
   Saxon legends 189.
   _See_ Legendary Origins, iii. 90-134.
 Ettrick, forest of, divided the Britons of Alclyde from the Angles of
    Bernicia, i. 235.
 Eubonia, settlement of the Firbolg in, i. 138.
 Eugein. _See_ Oan.
 Eugenius the Bald (Owen), king of the Strathclyde Britons, i. 393;
   slain, 394.
 Evans, Prof. of New York, i. 250.
 Ewen of Otter, clan, iii. 474.

 Faelchu mac Dorbeni, the last of Columba’s successors, ii. 177.
 Failbe, abbot of Iona, i. 245; ii. 168.
 Falkirk (Fahkirk), church at, called _Ecglis Breacc_, ii. 36.
   _See_ Brychan.
 Falkland, thanage of, iii. 268.
 Fallofaudus, a Roman general in Britain, i. 99.
 Family of Iona. _See_ Columba.
 Fandafuith (Fandowie), thanage of, iii. 274.
 Farne Islands, i. 237.
 Feacht, or ‘expedition,’ the burden of, ii. 173; iii. 151, 227,
    234.
   _See_ Sluaged.
 Fearchar Fada, leader of the Cinel Baedan, i. 250, 251, ᚬv1
    264ᚬ; iii. 342, 476;
   death of, i. 272.
 Fearn, dedication to St. Aidan at, i. 260.
 Fendoch, Roman camp at, i. 45, 88.
 Feochan, promontory of (Ross-Foichen, Irrosfoichne), battle at, i. ᚬv1
    286ᚬ.
 _Feodofirma_ (fee-farm), tenure of, what it was in Scotland, iii. 85,
    237-8.
 Feradach, son of Sealbach, is put in chains by Angus, i. 290.
 Fergus Brit, second abbot of Iona, ii. 151.
 Fergus Mor mac Erc of Dalriada, i. 140.
 Fergus Salach, Cinel, a subdivision of the tribe of Loarn, i. 230.
 Fergusianus, legend of, ii. 232.
 _Ferleighinn_, lector or man of learning in the monasteries, ii. ᚬv2
    342ᚬ, 444 _seq_.
 Fermartyn, thanage of, iii. 252.
 Fermoy, Book of, cited, iii. 35, 410.
 Ferot, son of Finguine, slain, i. 288.
 Fettercairn (Fotherkern), in the Mearns, i. 380.
 Fetteresso (Fodresach), Malcolm I. slain at, i. 364.
 Fiachna mac Deman, king of the Cruithnigh of Dalaradia, i. 241.
 Fife, taken possession of by Agricola, i. 48;
   represented in the Pictish legend by Fib (_see_ Cruithne), 185,
      186;
   province of, iii. 43;
   attacked by the Northmen, i. 327;
   inhabitants of, called ‘Scoti,’ 328;
   Saxon barons acquire lands in, iii. 26;
   no thanes in, 305, 356;
   demesne of the earls of, 305.
   _See_ Fothreve.
 Fillan, St., ii. 33, 175;
   pastoral staff of, 407.
 Finan, bishop of Lindisfarne, i. 258.
 Findhorn, river, i. 336, 338.
 Finé or sept in Ireland, origin of the term, iii. 171;
   the _ciné_ or kinsfolk, 171;
   the _ceile_ or tenants, 172;
   the _Fuidhir_ or stranger septs, 173;
   territorial basis of the Finé, 175;
   the four families or groups of the kinsfolk, 176-9;
   members of, 179;
   status of the Geilfiné chief, 180-4;
   his relation to the Ri Tuath, 184;
   law of succession, 187;
   attendance upon the sluaged or hosting, dun-building, 188;
   fosterage customs, 190;
   later state of the Finés, 192-7.
 Finé or clan in Scotland, iii. 284;
   first appearance of the clans, 302;
   the Chief and the kinsmen, 318;
   the native-men, 318;
   fosterage, 321;
   the clan and its members, 323;
   names and position of the clans, 327-9;
   termination of clanship, 365.
   _See_ Clan.
 Fingaine (MacKinnons), clan, iii. 331, 363, 365, 488.
 Finglen, in Loarn, battle at, i. 284.
 Fingaill. _See_ Galls.
 Finguine, leader of the Picts of Manann, slain, i. 270.
 Finguine, son of Drostan, slain, i. 288.
 Finlaic (Finleikr), mormaer of Moray and Ross, defeated by Sigurd, i.
    375;
   afterwards restored, 389;
   slain, 397.
 Finnian, influence of, ii. 51.
 Finntuir, son of Thorfinn, i. 409.
 Fintan Munnu, an Irish saint, iii. 92.
 Firbolg, the, i. 138, 173 _seq_., 226; iii. 92, 105.
 Fishing-villages established in the Highlands and Islands, iii. 376.
 Flaithbertach, king of Ireland, is assisted by the fleet of Dalriada,
    i. ᚬv1 289-90ᚬ.
 Flann Mainistrech, _Synchronisms of_, i. 139.
 Flavia, a Roman province in Britain, i. 96, 97, 103.
 Fodresach. _See_ Fetteresso.
 Fordell, thanage of, iii. 268.
 Fordun’s _Chronicle_ referred to or quoted, i. 12, 18, ᚬv1
    20ᚬ, 21; iii. 40, 47, 65, 70, 72, 84, 216, 304, 307, 480.
 Fordun, church of, dedicated to Palladius, ii. 29.
 Forest land, iii. 283.
 Forglen, principal church of Adamnan, ii. 174;
   banner of Columba preserved in, 175.
 Forgrund, thanage of, iii. 276.
 Fortevieth (Forteviot, Perthshire), Regulus brings remains of St.
    Andrew to, i. 297;
   Kenneth mac Alpin dies at, 313;
   thanage of, iii. 269.
 Forth (Forc), firth of (_see_ Boderia), i. 47 _seq_.; iii. 122,
    212;
   isthmus between it and the Clyde, i. 8;
   fortified by Agricola, 46, 47;
   earthen rampart constructed by Lollius Urbicus (Antonine’s Wall),
      which became the boundary of the Roman province, ᚬv1 77-79ᚬ;
   its reconstruction by Severus, 81, 89;
   church south of the Forth and Clyde, ii. 36.
   _See_ Frisian Sea.
 Fortingall, Roman camp and station at, i. 88.
 Fortrenn, province of, comprehending Strathearn and Menteith, i. ᚬv1
    207ᚬ, 340, 342; iii. 44, 46;
   the Britons of, i. 211, 231, 238;
   siege of Dunduirn, its principal stronghold, 264;
   after Ecgfrid’s death, Fortrenn used as synonymous with the kingdom
      of the Picts, 269;
   the men of, defeated by the Danes, 307, 308, 315, ᚬv1
      319ᚬ, 380; iii. 122.
 Fosterage, in Ireland, iii. 190;
   in Wales, 207;
   in Scotland, 321.
 Fothad, second bishop of Albans, ii 327.
 Fothad, last bishop of Alban, ii. 344.
 Fothadh Canann, iii. 121.
 Fothergill (Fortingall), thanage of, iii. 271.
 Fotherkern. _See_ Fettercairn.
 Fothreve (Fothrif), district of (Kinross-shire and west of Fife), i.
    231, 341; iii. 43, 46, 61.
 Franks, first appearance of the, i. 92.
 Fraser, Sir William,—remarks on his work on _The Lennox_, i. 22;
    iii. 360;
   on _Earls of Cromartie_, 351, 353, 355.
 Freeman’s _Old English History_, i. 150;
   his _Norman Conquest_, 385.
 Frisian Sea, name applied to the Firth of Forth by Nennius, i. ᚬv1
    191ᚬ.
 Frisians (Phrissones), the, i. ᚬv1 145-6ᚬ;
   settlements of, on the shores of the Forth, 191, 192;
   their influence on the southern Picts, 231.
   _See_ Dunfres.
 Fuidhir, or stranger serfs, iii. 173, 318.

 Gabran, son of Domangart, king of Dalriada, i. ᚬv1 142-144ᚬ;
   the Cinel Gabran, one the three tribes of the Dalriadic kingdom, ᚬv1
      229ᚬ;
   contest with Cinel Loarn for the throne, ᚬv1 272-3ᚬ, 287.
 Gadeni, tribe of the, i. 71;
   their territory, 106.
 Gadhelic branch of the Celtic race, and its subdivisions, i. 226,
    227;
   its language, 194.
 Gaedhel Glass, the _eponymus_ of the Gaedhelic race, i. 179; iii.
    94.
   _See_ Gathelus.
 Gael (Gadheal, Gaedhel, Gaethel), name now applied to all the
    inhabitants of Scotland who belonged to the Gaelic branch of the
    Celtic race, i. 343; iii. 101, 365.
 Gaelic language, and its dialectic varieties, i. 193, 194,
    ᚬv1 203-4ᚬ;
   Scotch Gaelic, ii. ᚬv2 453-4ᚬ;
   termed Albanic, Scotic or Scotch, 460,
     and later, called Irish or Erse, 462; iii. 40, 41;
   becomes a written language after the Reformation, ii. 463.
   _See also_ Irish.
 Gaelic population, causes affecting, in eighteenth century, iii. 372;
   state in 1817, 376;
   in 1847-50, 377.
 Gaelic race, tribal organisation of the, iii. 136;
   broken up, 300.
 Gaius Campus, the name, i. ᚬv1 255-6ᚬ.
 Gal (= valour) a component part of Gaelic names not to be confounded
    with “Gall” (= strangers), iii. 28, 333.
 Gala, river, i. 237.
 Galgacus, a Caledonian chief, leader of the natives at the battle of
    Mons Granpius, i. ᚬv1 52-56ᚬ.
 Gallgaidheal, Irish term for Galloway, i. 239, 311;
   applied to the Gaelic race there and in the Western Isles as under
      the rule of Galls; their association with piratical Northmen,
      311-12;
   the term also applied to the inhabitants of the Western Isles and
      districts under the Norwegian rule, 345; iii. 29-39;
   finally limited to Galloway, 292;
   historic sketch of their lords, 292-300;
   tribe, 365.
 Galloway (Galweia, Gallovidia, Gallweithia, Gallwydel (Welsh),
    Gallgaidel (Irish), province of, i. 9;
   occupied by the Novantæ, 10, 72, 127,
     who became known as the Picts of Galloway, 131, 132, ᚬv1
        238ᚬ;
   legend relating to, ᚬv1 187-189ᚬ;
   their isolated position, ᚬv1 202-3ᚬ;
   subject to the Angles, 271, 311;
   invaded by the Scots under Alpin, 291;
   Anglic power wanes about the end of the eighth century, 311
      (_see_ Whithern);
   attacked by the Northmen, ᚬv1 322-3ᚬ;
   its nominal connection with Bernicia, 373;
   thrice invaded by Malcolm IV., and its inhabitants brought under
      subjection, 472;
   revolt in the following reign, 475;
   insurrection in, 478;
   again revolt under Alexander II., but become incorporated into the
      kingdom in 1235, ᚬv1 487-8ᚬ;
   Alan, lord of, iii. 75;
   the tribal system in, 214.
 Galls, a term applied to the Norwegians and Danes (Finngaill =
    fair-haired Galls or Norwegians) (Dubhgaill = dark-haired Galls or
    Danes), i. 304; iii. 28, 292, 233;
   also to Saxons, i. 311;
   sometimes = ‘foreign,’ 387.
 Garnaid, Bredei, and Talore (sons of Wid), successively kings of the
    Picts, i. 242, ᚬv1 246-7ᚬ, 257.
 Garnard, son of Donald, king of the Picts, i. 305.
 Garrioch (Garvyach), earldom of, iii. 69.
 Gartnaid, son of Donnell, king of the Picts, who remained independent
    after the others had fallen under the sway of Osuiu, i. 258;
   voyage of his sons to Ireland, 259.
 Gathelus, first leader of the Gaethel, i. 343; iii. 494.
 Gaul, mission of St. Columbanus to (A.D. 590), ii. 6.
 Genealogies, spurious, of the Grants, iii. 349;
   the Camerons, 350;
   Mackenzies, 351;
   Mathesons, Macleans, and Macleods, 354;
   MacIntoshes, 356;
   Campbells, 359;
   earls of Lennox, 359;
   Donnachie (Robertsons), M‘Nabs, MacGregors, 362.
 Geiza, isle of, iii. 439.
 Gentiles, a term applied to the northern pirates, i. 304.
 Geoffrey of Monmouth, fabulous history of, 117, 172; iii. 94.
 Gerontius, one of Constantine’s generals, a native of Britain, i. ᚬv1
    109-112ᚬ.
 Gervadius, St., or Gernadius, ii. 369.
 Gigha, island of, i. 285.
 Gilcomgan, mormaer of Moray, and father of Lulach, king of Scotia, i.
    411.
 Gildas, the British historian, his narrative of the Roman occupation,
    i. 112, 113;
   note on the Lives of, ᚬv1 116-118ᚬ;
   his account of the Picts, ᚬv1 121-2ᚬ;
   of the settlement of the Saxons in Britain, ᚬv1 144-5ᚬ.
 Gillaeoin, clan. _See_ Macleans.
 Gillebride, father of Somerled, iii. 33.
 Gillechallam of Raarsa, clan, iii. 433.
 Gillechrist, Comes de Menteth, iii. 67.
 Gillemichel Makduf, Comes de Fif, iii. 63-4.
 Gilli, earl of Colonsay, i. 379, ᚬv1 389-90ᚬ.
 Giollaespuig, son of Alasdair of Ile, iii. 407, 409.
 Giraldus Cambrensis, cited, iii. 48.
 Giric. _See_ Grig.
 Giudi, town of (_see_ Alauna), i. 71, 208, 238, ᚬv1
    254-5ᚬ.
 Glammis, i. 398;
   thanage of, iii. 262, 266.
 Glasgow, diocese of, re-constituted, ii. 375.
 Glein, river, Arthur’s first battle on, i. 153.
 Glendowachy (Doune), thanage of, iii. 251.
 Glenfalloch, i. 273.
   _See_ Clach na Breatan.
 Glenlemnae, valley of the Leven—[Argyll or Dumbarton?] Dalriadic
    slaughter in, i. ᚬv1 272-3ᚬ.
 Glenmairison (Glenmureson), in West Lothian, battle of, i. 249.
 Glenrie, or the king’s glen, i. 411.
 Glentilt, thanage of, iii. 86, 272.
 Glenurquhir, Laird of, iii. 435.
 Godfray mac Aralt. _See_ Godred.
 Godfrey. _See_ Guthfrith.
 _Gododin_, a Welsh poem, i. 250.
 Godred (Gofra, Gofrath), son of Aralt, king of Man, vanquished by the
    sons of Nial, i. ᚬv1 376-8ᚬ.
 Godred Crovan, a ruler of the Western Isles, i. 441; iii. 331.
   _See_ Reginald.
 Godwine, Earl, i. 410.
 Gospatrick, a grandson of Crinan, origin of name, i. 394, ᚬv1
    419ᚬ.
 Gothbrith, leader of a band of Danes, i. 347.
 Gowrie, district of, i. 281, 341; iii. 43, 45, 133;
   earldom of, 275.
 Gracaban, a Danish earl slain at Tynemoor, i. ᚬv1 347-8ᚬ.
 Grampians, the, i. 11, 47, 49, _et al_.
 Granpius, Mons, battle of, i. 52 _seq_.;
   conflicting theories as to the position of, 54.
 Grants, MS. history of the, iii. 349-50.
 Grassy Walls, Roman camp at, i. 49, 51, 86.
 Gratian, Emperor, i. 104, 105, 108.
 Greeks, their early acquaintance with the British Isles, i. 29,
    30.
 Green’s _English People_, i. 150.
 Gregor (MacGregors), clan, iii. 329, 331, 365, 487.
 Grelauga, daughter of Duncan, jarl of Caithness, and wife of Thorfinn,
    i. 374.
 Grig (Carus, Ciricius, Girg, Giric, Girig), son of Dungaile (_see_
    Dunnagual), associated as governor with Eocha, king of the Picts, i.
    329;
   error of Chalmers with regard to him, 330;
   events of his reign, ᚬv1 331-4ᚬ;
   he was the first to give liberty to the Scottish Church, ii. ᚬv2
      320ᚬ.
   _See_ Eglisgirg.
 Gruoch, daughter of Boete (_q.v_.), and wife of Macbeth, i. 406.
 Guaire (Macquarries), clan, iii. 331, 436, 488.
 Guaul, the name given by Nennius to the northern wall, i. 153.
 Guinnion, fastness of, i. 153.
 Gunn, clan, iii. 330.
 Guorthigirn, a leader of the Britons, i. 146, 147, 151,
    189.
 Gureit (Gwriad), king of Alclyde, i. 257.
 Gurth, a name of Skye, i. ᚬv1 395-6ᚬ.
 Guthferth, son of Sitriuc, i. 351.
 Guthfrith, Sitriuc’s brother, driven from Deira by Aethelstan, i. ᚬv1
    352ᚬ.
 Guthorm, son of Earl Sigurd, i. 344.
 Guthred, son of Hardicnut, king of the Northumbrians south of the Tyne,
    i. 332, 349;
   after his death Bernicia under lords of Bamborough, 373.
 Gwenedotia, Gwynedd (North Wales), i. 244, 246, 254;
    iii. 198.
 Gwyddyl, in modern Welsh denotes the Irish, i. 197; iii. 101.
   _See_ Gael.
 Gwyddyl Ffichti, the Welsh designation of the Picts who settled in
    Britain, i. 197, 343; iii. 48, 101-104.

 Hadrian, the Emperor, his arrival in Britain, i. 60;
   the first Roman wall, between the Tyne and the Solway, constructed by
      him, 60, 61, 90, 91.
 Hæfe, river. _See_ Avon.
 Hafursfiord, battle of, i. 336.
 Hagiology of the Irish church, ii. ᚬv2 425-43ᚬ;
   of Scottish church, 444.
 Hagustald. _See_ Hexham.
 Hailes, Lord, i. 6;
   his _Annals of Scotland_, 18; iii. 442.
 Hakon, Earl, of Norway, i. 379.
 Halfdan, son of Ragnar Lodbrok, leads a band of Danes against
    Northumbria, the Galloway Picts, and the Strathclyde Britons, i. ᚬv1
    325-6ᚬ;
   again attacks Northumbria, 332.
 Hallad, earl of Orkney, i. 344.
 Hamiltoun, Lord, iii. 439.
 Harald Harfagr, king of Norway, i. ᚬv1 311-12ᚬ, 335;
   chronology of his reign, 336, 344.
 Harald Sigurdson, i. 413.
 Hardacnut, king of England, i. 408.
 Hardicnut, i. 332.
 Harris (Harreik, Herreis, Harrayis), isle of, iii. 429.
 Hastings, David de, a Norman baron, iii. 75.
 Hatfield (Haethfeld), battle of, i. ᚬv1 243-4ᚬ.
 Havard, eldest son of Thorfinn the ‘Skull-cleaver,’ i. 374.
 Hebrides, estimation of the extent of the, iii. 439;
   tillers of the ground in the, exempt from war, 439;
   land tenure after the sixteenth century, 372;
   townships in the Inner, in 1850, ᚬv1 374-8ᚬ,
     in the Outer, ᚬv1 378-93ᚬ.
   _See_ Ebudæ, Long Island.
 Hefenfelth. _See_ Catscaul.
 Heligoland, i. 189, 190.
 Helsker, isle of, iii. 431.
 Hengist and Horsa, Saxon leaders, land in Britain, i. 146, ᚬv1
    149ᚬ, 189.
 Hennessy, W. M., iii. 35;
   translation of the tract _Na tri Colla_, 462.
 Hesperides, a name applied to the Cassiterides, i. ᚬv1 167-169ᚬ.
 Hexham (Hagustald), i. 245, 262, 275;
   church of, founded by St. Wilfrid, ii. 210, 213; iii. 81.
 Highland Clans, comparison between them and the Afghaun Tribes, by Sir
    Walter Scott, iii. 456;
   their legendary descent, 458-490.
 Highland Line, the, traced northwards from Loch Lomond, iii. 285-6.
 Highlanders, Fordun’s description of, iii. 307;
   raid into Angus, 308;
   leaders thereof outlawed, 309.
 Highlands, state of the, in the sixteenth century, iii. 326;
   emigration from the, 373.
 Highlands and Islands, tenure of land in, subsequent to the sixteenth
    century, iii. 368;
   abolition of calps, 368;
   townships, 369-371, 374, 378;
   deer-forests, 371;
   fishing-villages, 376;
   causes affecting the population, 372.
 Hilef, river (the Isla, or Lyff?), i. ᚬv1 340-1ᚬ.
 Himilco, traditionary account of his voyage to the British Isles, i.
    30.
 Hoddam, Kentigern’s first see, ii. 191.
 Holderness, i. 420.
 Holy Island. _See_ Lindisfarne.
 Holyrood, foundation charter of, i. 240, 241.
 Home, D. Milne, account of the wall between Forth and Clyde, i. ᚬv1
    78ᚬ.
 Honor price, the, in the tribe, iii. 152-3, 189, 204, 217.
 Honorius, Emperor, troubles in the Roman province in Scotland during
    his reign, i. ᚬv1 105-111ᚬ;
   termination of the Roman dominion in Britain, 112.
 Honorius I., Pope, letter from, to King Aeduin, ii. 155.
 Horesti, the, and their territory, i. 57;
   some of them enrolled by Severus among the Roman auxiliaries, ᚬv1
      89ᚬ.
 Horsley, John, his _Britannia Romana_, i. 23, 102, 103.
 Hound Earl, the. _See_ Hundi Jarl.
 Hoy, isle of, i. 386.
 Hubba, son of Ragnar Lodbrok, i. 332.
 Huisdinn, son of Alasdair, Earl of Ross, his descendants, iii. 408.
 Hundi (Hvelp), son of Sigurd, taken by Olaf from Orkney to Norway as a
    hostage, i. 386.
 Hundi Jarl, the (Crinan, lay abbot of Dunkeld), i. 401; ii. ᚬv2
    337ᚬ.
 Hungus, King. _See_ Angus.
 Hustain (MacDonalds of Slate), clan, iii. 330.
 Hwnayis, two isles, iii. 436.
 _Hy Fiachraich_, tracts entitled _The Tribes and Customs of_, quoted,
    iii. 158, 193;
   _Hereditary Proprietors of the Clann_, quoted, 159.
 Hy (Hii). _See_ Iona.
 _Hy Many, Customs of_, quoted, iii. 160.
 Hy Neill, the, i. 248, 249; iii. 340.

 Ian (MacIans), clan, iii. 330.
   _See_ Eoin.
 Iberian or Basque race, an, preceded the Celts in Britain and Ireland,
    i. 164 _seq_., 226;
   language of, 193.
 Iceni, the, a powerful British nation, defeated by Ostorius, i. ᚬv1
    36ᚬ;
   insurrection of, under Queen Boadicea, 38.
 I Columchill. _See_ Iona.
 Ictis, island of, i. 166.
 Ida, son of Eobba, forms the kingdom of Bernicia (A.D. 547-559), i. ᚬv1
    155ᚬ, 156; iii. 19.
 Idvies. _See_ Edevyn.
 Iena estuary (the Cree), i. 66.
 Ierne. _See_ Ireland.
 Iernian Isles, a name applied by a Greek poet to the British Isles, i.
    29.
 Ila, river (the Ulie, Helmsdale), i. 67;
   isle of, iii. 437.
 Imergi, ancestor of Somerled, Regulus de Herergaidel, i. 397.
   _See_ Jehmarc.
 Imhair Ua Imhair, leader of the Norwegians, slain by the Men of
    Fortrenn, i. 339.
 Imhar (Imhair, Ivar), king of the Northmen, takes Alclyde, and returns
    with Amlaiph to Dublin with great booty, i. ᚬv1 324-5ᚬ.
 Inchaffray, church of, iii. 269.
 Inchigall (Innsigall) = islands of the Galls, a term applied to the
    Western Isles when colonised by the Norwegians, i. 345, ᚬv1
    376ᚬ; iii. 292.
 Inchkeith. _See_ Alauna.
 Inchmahome, church of, dedicated to Colman (Mocholmoc) of Dromore, ii.
    32.
 Indulph, son of Constantin, king of Alban (A.D. 254-262), i. 365;
   two events in his reign: Edinburgh and the district round it
      surrendered to the Scots, and the descent of Norwegian pirates on
      Buchan, 365;
   different statements as to his death, 366.
 Ingibiorg, widow of Thorfinn, becomes wife of Malcolm III., i. ᚬv1
    414ᚬ.
 Inguar (Imhair), son of Ragnar Lodbrok, ancestor of the Danish kings of
    Dublin, i. 332;
   kings who were descendants of, 376.
 _Inisfallen, Annals of_, i. 26.
 Inner Hebrides. _See_ Hebrides.
 Innermessan, farm of, fortified moat on, i. 72.
 Innes, Cosmo, his _Scotland in the Middle Ages_, i. 12;
   on the Marr letters-patent, iii. 442.
 Innes, Thomas, remarks on his Essay on the ancient inhabitants of
    Scotland, i. 18;
   his use of the term ‘Midland Britons,’ 87.
 Innrechtach, probably a leader of the Picts of Galloway, i. ᚬv1 291-2ᚬ.
 Innrechtach ua Finachta, abbot of Iona, takes the reliquaries of
    Collumcille to Ireland, ii. 305;
   killed on his way to Rome, 309.
 Inschenycht, isle of, iii. 436.
 Inscriptions found along the course of the wall of Antoninus, i. ᚬv1
    78ᚬ, 79.
 Inverculen, i. 366.
 Inverkeillor, thanage of, iii. 265.
 Inverdovet (Inverdufatha), i. ᚬv1 327-8ᚬ.
 Inverry. _See_ St. Monans.
 Invers and Abers, on the distribution of, i. ᚬv1 220-222ᚬ.
 Iona (Hy, Hii, I Columchill), island of, i. 183, 251;
   description of it, ii. ᚬv2 89-93ᚬ;
   monastery of, i. ᚬv1 258-9ᚬ;
   church plundered, and many slain by the Northmen (A.D. 794), ᚬv1
      304ᚬ; ii. 290 _seq_.;
   Dunkeld afterwards the seat of supremacy for the Columban churches,
      i. 305;
   the monastery rebuilt with stone, ii. 297;
   shrine of Columba deposited therein, 300 (_see_ Diarmaid);
   again ravaged by the Danes (A.D. 825), 300 (_see_ Blathmac);
   again in the year 986, i. 377; ii. ᚬv2 332-35ᚬ;
   in 1203 the monastery rebuilt by Reginald, second son of Somerled,
      ii. 415;
   who founds the Benedictine abbey and nunnery of, 415.
 Ireland (Ierne), originally called Eriu, also Hibernia, and Scotia, the
    mother country of the Scots, i. 1, 2, 130;
   the name Scotia, by which Ireland alone was meant prior to the tenth
      century, transferred to Scotland in the eleventh, 3, 5;
   fabulous history of, and the commencement of its true history, ᚬv1
      25ᚬ, 180;
   its ancient inhabitants, 178;
   ethnological legends, ᚬv1 172-183ᚬ;
   ravaged by Ecgfrid, ᚬv1 264-5ᚬ;
   final conflict with the Danes, 386 _seq_.;
   monastic church in, ii. ᚬv2 41-50ᚬ (_see_ Monastery);
   twelve apostles of, 51;
   church of the southern Scots of, conforms to Rome, 159;
   southern and northern districts defined, 161;
   influence of the last three pagan kings of, in Scotland, iii.
      114-120;
   Erc and his sons (_see_ Erc);
   provinces in, 42;
   ancient laws of, 151 _seq_.
   _See also_ Finé, Tuath.
 Irish Annals to be used with discrimination, i. 24, 25;
   Irish early history, artificial character of, iii. 97;
   manuscripts, 458 _seq_.
 Irish (Gaelic) language, i. 193;
   spoken dialects of, ii. 450;
   peculiarities of, 451;
   written, 452.
   _See_ Languages.
 Irt, isle of, iii. 431.
 Irvine, river, Roman remains on the, i. 73.
 Isca Silurum (Caerleon), i. 81.
 Isla, island of, i. 140; iii. 213, 438.
 Isla, river, peninsula formed by its junction with the Tay, the
    probable position of the Roman army before the battle of Mons
    Granpius, i. ᚬv1 52-54ᚬ; iii. 276.
 Isles, Norwegian kingdom of the: the Western Isles subdued and
    colonised (A.D. 793-806), i. ᚬv1 304-5ᚬ, ᚬv1 311-12ᚬ; iii. 28
    _seq_.;
   Thorstein the Red devastates the northern provinces of Scotland (A.D.
      875), i. ᚬv1 326-7ᚬ, 336; ii. 317;
   colonisation of Orkney and Shetland, with Caithness and Sutherland
      (A.D. 889), i. 335, 342, 344; iii. 47;
   descent of a Norwegian fleet on Buchan (A.D. 954), i. ᚬv1 365-6ᚬ;
   the Danes oppose the Norwegians in their possession of the Isles
      (A.D. 970), ii. 332 _seq_.;
   Somerled drives the Norwegians out of the mainland, and conquers part
      of the Isles (A.D. 1154-64), i. ᚬv1 469-73ᚬ; iii. 33-35;
   decline of the Norwegian rule till the Isles were formally ceded to
      Alexander III. (A.D. 1266), i. 495; iii. 35-39.
   _See_ Einar, Sigurd.
 Isles, Chiefs of the, i. 441; iii. 37;
   sketch of the Lords of the, 292-300;
   their extinction, 300;
   legendary history, 397;
   an Irish poem (and translation) relative to the kingdom of the,
      410-27;
   bishop of the, 433 _seq_.;
   description of, with their pertinents and pendicles (written
      1577-95), 428-440.
   _See_ also under names of the various islands.
 Isthmus between the Forth and Clyde, wall of Antoninus on (_see_ Roman
    walls): stations on it, i. 78.
 Ith, race of, iii. 111.
 Itunæ Æstuarium, the (Solway Firth), i. 64, 66.
 Itys, river (Carron), i. 69.
 Ivar. _See_ Imhar.

 Jarrow (on Tyne), monastery of, i. ᚬv1 278-9ᚬ.
 Jehmarc (Imergi?) submits to Cnut, i. 395, 397, 405.
 Jerome, St., his mention of the Attacotts in Gaul, i. 101, ᚬv1
    106ᚬ.
 Jocelyn of Furness, biographer of St. Kentigern, ii. 179 _seq_.
 John the Lame, clan, iii. 470.
 Jugantes, a sept of the Brigantes, i. 37.
 Julian, Emperor, i. 98.
 Julius Cæsar, invasion of Britain by, i. 31;
   his account of the inhabitants, 32.
 Julius Frontinus, a Roman governor in Britain, i. 39.
 Jura, island of, battle at, i. 264; _see also_ iii. 213, 438.
 Jutes, the, invade Britain with the Saxons and Angles, i. 149, ᚬv1
    189-192ᚬ.

 Kaffirs, our war with the, illustrative of that between the Romans and
    the tribes of ancient Britain, i. 85.
 Kali (or Karl) Hundason, appellation given to Duncan, son of Crinan, i.
    400, 401, 404.
 Kari Solmundson, i. 378.
 Kathenes (Kettins), thanage of, iii. 266.
 Kay and Qwhwle, clan, iii. 310.
 _Keledei_ (_Cele De_), (_see_ Anchorites, Culdees), grant of lands at
    Lochleven to the, ii. 355;
   superseded by canons regular, 384;
   suppression of those of St. Andrews, 384-388;
   of Lochleven, 338;
   of Monymusk, 389-392;
   of Abernethy, 399;
   regulations for the government of the community of, at St. Andrews,
      ii. 357;
   Armagh, 359;
   Iona, 360;
   Clonmacnois, 362.
 Kells, Book of, iii. 170.
 Kells (Cennanus, in Meath), church of, i. 305;
   portion of St. Columba’s relics transferred to, 310; ii. ᚬv2
      307ᚬ.
 Kelly, thanage of, iii. 268.
 Kelp manufacture in the Highlands, iii. 374;
   failure of, 376.
 Kelso (Calchvynyd), iii. 102.
 Kemble’s _Saxons in England_, i. ᚬv1 150-1ᚬ.
 Kenneth mac Alpin (Kynadius), chronology of his reign (844-60), i. ᚬv1
    308ᚬ;
   becomes king of the Picts, ᚬv1 309-10ᚬ;
   obscurity of this period, 313;
   causes and nature of the revolution which placed him on the Pictish
      throne, ᚬv1 314-16ᚬ; ii. 306, 315;
   re-establishes the Columban Church, selecting Dunkeld as the
      Metropolitan see, 307;
   builds a church there, and removes to it part of the relics of
      Columba, 307;
   question as to his paternal descent, i. 321;
   A.D. 860 the true year of his death, 308, 313;
   his sons and daughters, 313.
 Kenneth (971-95), son of Malcolm, king of Alban, i. 368;
   ravages the territory of the Britons, 368;
   invades Northumbria, 369;
   said to have slain Amlaiph, son of Indulph, 370;
   untrustworthy statements as to the cession of any part of Northumbria
      to him, ᚬv1 370-74ᚬ;
   contest as to the sovereignty of Caithness, ᚬv1 374-80ᚬ;
   slain at Fettercairn, 380;
   his reign an important one both for the Scottish Church and for Iona,
      ii. ᚬv2 331-2ᚬ.
 Kenneth (997-1004), son of Dubh, king of Alban, i. ᚬv1 382-3ᚬ.
 Kenneth (Mackenzies), clan, iii. 330, 354, 365;
   legendary descent, 485.
 Kent. _See_ Cantium.
 Kentigern, St., i. 117;
   biographies of, ii. ᚬv2 179-185ᚬ;
   early notice of, 186;
   driven to Wales, 187;
   founds the monastery of Llanelwy (St. Asaph’s), 188;
   recalled by Rydderch Hael, 190;
   fixes his first see at Hoddam, 191;
   missions to Galloway, Albania, and the Orkneys, 192;
   returns to Glasgow, 193;
   visited by Columba, 194;
   his death, 196.
 Ketill Flatnose (Caittil Finn), i. 311, 312, 326; iii.
    29.
 Kettins. _See_ Kathenes.
 Kilbride MS., iii. 458, 460.
 Kildare, church of, dedicated to St. Bridget, ii. 309.
 Kilmalemnok, thanage of, iii. 249.
 Kilmun, condition of Columban church of, ii. 410.
 Kilrymont (Cellrighmonaid). _See_ St. Andrews.
 Kinat, son of Ferat, king of the Picts, i. 309.
 Kinclaven, thanage of, iii. 276, 277.
 Kindeloch, Loch, old name of New Abbey parish in Kirkcudbright, i. ᚬv1
    137ᚬ.
   _See_ Cendaeladh.
 Kindrochet (Chondrochedalvan), in Aberdeenshire, church of, dedicated
    to St. Andrew, i. 298.
 Kinelvadon (Cinel Baedan), a small state in Dalriada, i. 264.
 Kingaltevy, thanage of, iii. 263.
 Kinneir, thanage of, iii. 268.
 Kinross, thanage of, iii. 268.
 Kintyre (Cindtyre, Pentir), peninsula of:
   known to the Romans as the ‘Promontorium Caledoniæ,’ i. 40; ii.
      85;
   visited by Agricola, i. 47;
   settlement of the Irish Scots in, 140 _seq_.;
   possessed by the Cinel Gabran, 229, 273;
   mentioned in the _Gododin_, 250;
   Norwegians in, 387;
   sheriffdom of, and boundaries, iii. 89.
 Kiritinus (Curitan), bishop and abbot of Rossmeinn, i. ᚬv1 277-8ᚬ.
 Kirkbuddo, its connection with St. Boethius, i. 135.
 Kirkcaldy, ii. 226.
 Kirkintulloch, i. 161.
 Kirriemuir (Westermore), Aethelstan advances to, in his invasion of
    Alban, i. 352.
 Knaresborough, i. 359.
 Kyle and adjacent regions subdued, (A.D. 750) by Eadberct of
    Northumbria, i. ᚬv1 294-5ᚬ.
 Kyncarden, thanage of, iii. 258.
 Kynlos, bridge of, i. 367.
 Kynnaber, thanage of, iii. 265.
 Kyntor (Kintore), thanage of, iii. 253.
 Kyrkness, lands of, iii. 61, 361.

 Labhran (Lawren), or MacLarens, clan, iii. 329, 343, 344, 363, 365,
    483.
 Lachlan, clan, iii. 331, 340, 341, 473.
 Laight Alpin (a stone pillar so called), incorrectly identified by
    Chalmers with Laight Castle, i. 292.
 Laisren, Columba’s successor in Iona, ii. 150.
 Lammermoor hills, i. 9, 240, 241;
   the scene of the early life of St. Cuthbert, ii. 201.
 Lamont (Ladmann), clan, iii. 331, 340, 341, 432.
 Land-measures, iii. 153-157, 200-203, 223-227.
 Land-tenure, iii. 83;
   in the Highlands and Islands subsequent to the sixteenth century, 368
      _seq_.
 Languages of Britain, and their relation to each other, i. 192
    _seq_., 226, 227;
   the three dialects of British (Welsh, Cornish, and Breton) not
      mutually intelligible, 199;
   topographic evidence as to character of, ᚬv1 212-225ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2
      453-457ᚬ;
   a written language introduced by Scottish monks, 457;
   Lowland Scotch termed English, 460, 462;
   subsequently the term Scotch passes into Lowland Scotch, 462.
   _See_ Manx.
 Laws of King William the Lion, referred to, iii. 217.
 Laws attributed to David I., iii. 217 _seq_.
 _Leabhar Gabhala_, the, and its ethnologic legends, i. 172 _seq_.
 Leader, river, ii. 201.
 Lecan, Book of, ii. 26; iii. 338, 446 _seq_.
 Lector (_Ferleiginn_), first appearance of the, ii. 444.
 Leeds, i. 255.
   _See_ Loidis.
 Legendary origins, iii. 90-120;
   extent of their historic basis, 120-24;
   paralleled suspiciously in events during the Roman occupation of
      Britain, 124.
   _See also_ Celtic population, Highland clans.
 Legion, city of the, i. 153.
 Leinster, Book of, i. 172; iii. 476.
 Leinster, kings of, i. 403.
 Lemannonius Sinus (Loch Long), i. 67, 75.
 Lennox (Levenach), district of, iii. 135;
   the earldom of, 69;
   its extinction, 300,
     and legendary descent, 341, 359, 416;
   remarks on Sir W. Fraser’s _Lennox_, 360.
 Leva, river (North Esk), i. 67.
 Leven, origin of the name, i. 221;
   rivers in Argyllshire and Dumbartonshire, ᚬv1 272-73ᚬ.
   _See_ Muredach Albanach.
 Lewis (Lodus), island of, i. 387, 396; iii. 429.
 Liaccmaelain, battle at, i. 264.
 _Libere tenentes_, definition of, iii. 240.
 _Liberi firmarii_, free farmers, iii. 243.
 Liffey, kings of, i. 403.
 Lindisfarne, island of (Ynys Medcaud), i. 237, 413;
   episcopal seat of Bishop Aidan, 251; ii. 158;
   removal of the see to York, i. 260;
   the island attacked by Norwegian and Danish pirates, ᚬv1 302-3ᚬ.
 Lindum, a town of the Damnonii, i. 73.
 Lingaran (Duin Nechtain), battle of (in parish of Dunnichen,
    Forfarshire), i. 265; ii. 213.
 Linnhe loch, i. 264.
 Lintrose, Roman camp at, i. 49, 50;
   plan of, in Roy’s _Military Antiquities_, 51.
 Liotr, son of Thorfinn, earl of Orkney, i. ᚬv1 374-5ᚬ.
 Lismore, Book of, iii. 117, 130, 137;
   isle of, 435.
   _See_ Argyll, Epidium.
 Literature and learning, influence of the Church on, ii. 448.
 Loarn, Cinel, one of the three tribes of the Dalriadic kingdom,
    inhabiting the district of Lorn, i. 229;
   its three subdivisions, 230, 264;
   contest for the Dalriadic throne with Cinel Gabran, ᚬv1 272-3ᚬ, ᚬv1
      287ᚬ;
   driven to extremity by Angus, they attack the Picts in Manann, and
      are defeated by Talorgan, Angus’s brother, ᚬv1 290-91ᚬ.
 Lochene, son of Nechtan Cennfota, slain, i. 246.
 Lochlannach (people of Lochlann), a term applied to the Norwegians, i.
    304.
 Lochleven, Culdees of, i. 406.
 Lochow, district of, the original seat of the clan O’Duibhn or
    Campbells, iii. 330, 331, 343.
 Logierait (Loginmahedd), church of, iii. 274.
 Loidis: confusion in Bede’s use of the word, i. ᚬv1 254-5ᚬ.
   _See_ Lothian.
 Loirgeclat (Loch Arklet), conflict between the Dalriads and Britons at,
    i. 273.
 Lollius Urbicus, sent to Britain, i. 76;
   constructs wall of Antoninus, ᚬv1 76-79ᚬ.
 Long Island (Outer Hebrides), present condition of population of
    townships in, iii. 378;
   methods of cultivation, 379-381;
   reclamation of moorland, 381;
   grazing, 382;
   hill-grazing, 385-87;
   shealings, 387;
   rents, 388;
   seaweed gathering, 389;
   fines and reparation for trespass by cattle, etc., 385, 390;
   laws and customs, 390-91;
   houses, 392;
   friendliness, 393;
   gradual disappearance of the system, 394.
   _See_ Highlands.
 Longus, river (the Add), i. 68, 216.
 Loogdeae (Loch Inch), battle near, i. 288.
 Lords of the Isles. _See_ Isles.
 Lorn, district of, i. 229;
   subdivisions of, 230;
   sheriffdom of, and boundaries, iii. 88.
 Lothian (Lothene, Loidis, Lodonea), districts comprised under this
    term, i. 131, 240, 241, 255;
   invaded six times by Kenneth Mac Alpin, 310, 374;
   surrendered to the Scots, 365;
   its cession by king Edgar to Kenneth son of Malcolm, not correct, ᚬv1
      370-74ᚬ;
   ceded to Malcolm ii., 393, 394;
   monasteries in, ii. 200;
   churches founded in Lothian only after the extinction of the Celtic
      church, 366.
 Loudon Hill, Roman remains on, i. 73.
 Lowthers, the, a group of hills, i. 9.
 Loxa, river (Lossie), i. 67, 216.
 Loyng, isle of, iii. 438.
 Luaire (Carlowrie?), battle at, i. 325.
 Lucopibia, a town of the Novantæ, i. 72, 132.
 Lucullus, a Roman governor in Britain, successor of Agricola, i. ᚬv1
    58ᚬ.
 Lugi, a northern tribe, i. 76, 206.
 Lulach, son of Gilcomgan, king of Scotia, i. 411.
 Lumphanan, i. 410, 413.
 Lupicinus, sent to Britain to oppose the Picts and Scots, i. 98.
 Lupus, Vivius, governor of Britain, i. 80.

 Macbeth (Maelbaethe), son of Finnlaec, his submission to king Cnut, i.
    395, 397;
   mormaer of Moray, ᚬv1 403-4ᚬ; iii. 53;
   king of Scotia, i. 405;
   kingdom invaded by Siward, earl of Northumbria, ᚬv1 408-9ᚬ;
   slain by Malcolm Ceannmor, at Lumphanan, 410.
 M‘Clane, Dowart (Great M‘Lane), iii. 434 _seq_.
 M‘Clane of Lochbuy, iii. 434, 435, 439.
 M‘Cloyd, Lewis, iii. 429, 431, 432.
 M‘Cloyd, Harreis, iii. 429, 431, 433.
 M‘Cowle of Lorne, iii. 435.
 Maccus (Magnus), son of Aralt, i. 376; iii. 30.
 Macdonald, Alexander, Gaelic scholar and poet, ii. 464.
 Macdonalds, the. _See_ Clanranald, Donald.
 Macdougalls, the. _See_ Dubhgal.
 Macduff, the fictitious, iii. 64.
 Macduff, clan, and its privileges, iii. 303-6.
   _See_ Gillemichel.
 MacDuffy (Makasie), Laird, iii. 438.
 MacEth, Malcolm, mystery of his antecedents, i. 462;
   raises a rebellion, 462;
   checked in Galloway, 464;
   finally defeated, taken prisoner, and confined, 464;
   liberated, 469;
   deprived of his eyesight, 470;
   retires to a monastery, 470.
 MacEth, Donald, eldest son of Malcolm, defeated and taken prisoner at
    Whithern, i. 469.
 MacEth, Kenneth, heads an  insurrection, is taken prisoner and
      beheaded, i. 483.
 MacEwens of Otter, iii. 340-41.
 M‘Firbis, sennachie, iii. 119, 458 _seq_.
 Macgregor, Dean, of Lismore, ii. 461.
   _See_ Lismore, Book of.
 MacGregors, clan. _See_ Gregor.
 MacIntosh, clan, iii. 356-8, 478.
   _See_ Chattan.
 MacIntyre, Duncan Ban, ii. 464.
 Mackay, clan. _See_ Morgan.
 Mackenzie, clan. _See_ Kenneth.
 MacKinnons, clan, iii. 363, 488.
   _See_ Fingaine.
 M‘Kynvin, Laird, iii. 432, 434.
 MacLarens, clan, iii. 343-4.
 MacLeans, clan, iii. 331, 343, 354, 480.
 MacLennans, clan, iii. 489.
 MacLeods, clan, iii. 331, 339, 354, 429, 460.
 MacMillans, clan, iii. 489.
 MacNabs, clan, iii. 362, 365, 486.
 MacNaughtons, the, iii. 342.
 M‘Neill, Barra, iii. 430.
 MacQuarries, clan. _See_ Guaire.
 MacRory, clan, iii. 471.
 M‘Thomas, clan, iii. 330.
 MacVurich, historian and sennachie, iii. 33 _seq_., 397 _seq_.
 Mac William, Donald Ban, aspires to the throne (A.D. 1181), i. ᚬv1
    476ᚬ;
   killed at Mamgarvia Moor, 479.
 MacWilliam, Guthred, son of Donald Ban, incites to rebellion (A.D.
    1211), and is beheaded, i. 482.
 MacWilliam, Donald Ban, heads an insurrection (A.D. 1215), is taken
    prisoner, and beheaded, i. 483.
 Madderty, abthanry of, iii. 87.
 Mæatæ, nation of the, i. 80, 81, 90, 99, 128;
   etymology of the name, 83, 87.
 Maelbaethe. _See_ Macbeth.
 Maelbrigde, bishop of Alban, ii. 330.
 Maelduin, bishop of Alban, ii. 343.
 Maelrubha, St., founds church of Applecross, ii. 169.
 Maelsechnaill, king of Ireland, death of, i. 323.
 Maerleswegen (Marleswein), i. 414, 415, 420.
 Magbiodr (Maelbrigdi), a Scottish earl, i. ᚬv1 374-5ᚬ, 397.
 Magedauc, Mocetauc. _See_ Mugdoch.
 Magh Fortren. _See_ Fortrenn.
 Magh Girgin. _See_ Circinn.
 Magh Lena, poem on battle of, iii. 154.
 Magh Rath, battle of, i. 198, 248.
 Magnus Barefoot, king of Norway, his first invasion of the Isles (A.D.
    1093), i. 437;
   his second expedition (1098), 441;
   third (1103), in which he was slain, ᚬv1 442-3ᚬ; iii. 32, 47.
 Maid of Norway, i. ᚬv1 496-7ᚬ.
   _See_ Margaret.
 Maighline, in Ulster, mistaken by Chalmers for Mauchlin, in Ayrshire,
    i. 132.
 Mailcu, a Dalaradian king, i. 136.
 Maine, Sir Henry, his _Early Institutions_, iii. 137, 146 _seq_.
 Major, John, cited, iii. 317.
 Malcolm I. son of Donald, king of Alban (A.D. 942-54), i. 360;
   invades Moreb or Moray and slays Cellach, ᚬv1 360-1ᚬ;
   Cumbria ceded to the Scots, 362, 382;
   penetrates into England as far as the Tees, 363;
   said by some to have been slain at Fetteresso by the men of Moerne,
      by others at Ulurn by the men of Moray, ᚬv1 364-5ᚬ.
 Malcolm II., son of Kenneth, king of Scotia (A.D. 1005-34), slays his
    predecessor Kenneth, son of Dubh, at Monzievaird, i. ᚬv1 382-3ᚬ;
   defeated in attempting to extend his territories beyond the Forth,
      ᚬv1 385-6ᚬ;
   state of the districts north of the Spey at this time, 386,
      _seq_.;
   gives one of his daughters in marriage to Sigurd the Stout, 386,
      401;
   and another to Crinan, abbot of Dunkeld, 390, 392;
   second attempt on Northumbria, battle of Carham, cession of Lothian
      to the Scots, ᚬv1 392-94ᚬ;
   his submission to Cnut the Dane, 395;
   his death, ᚬv1 397-8ᚬ;
   description of Britain at this period, 395;
   the name Scotia transferred from Ireland to Scotland, 398.
 Malcolm III. (Ceannmor), son of Duncan, king of Scotia (A.D. 1057-93),
    i. 408;
   is put in possession of the throne of Cumbria by Earl Siward, ᚬv1
      408-410ᚬ;
   slays Macbeth, king of Scotia, 410;
   date of his accession, 410;
   marries first, Ingibiorg, widow of Thorfinn, 414,
     and second, Margaret, sister of Eadgar Aetheling, 415, ᚬv1
        422ᚬ; iii. 215;
   advantages accruing to him from these relationships, i. ᚬv1 415-16ᚬ;
   his invasions of Northumbria, ᚬv1 417-22ᚬ;
   his relations with William the Conqueror, 423 _seq_.;
   his death, 430;
   state of Scotland at this time, ᚬv1 432-3ᚬ;
   his family, 434.
 Malcolm IV., grandson of David I., reigns twelve years (A.D. 1153-65),
    i. 469;
   first king crowned at Scone, 469;
   attacked by Somerled and the sons of Malcolm mac Eth, 469;
   temporary peace agreed to, 470;
   quells the revolt of six of the seven earls of Scotland, 471;
      iii. 65;
   subdues Galloway, i. 472;
   represses the rebellious spirit in the district of Moray, 473;
   defeats Somerled at Renfrew, 473;
   his death, 474.
 Malcolm, son of Donald, king of the Cumbrians, death of, i. ᚬv1 381-2ᚬ.
 Maldred, son of Crinan, i. 392, 394, 408, 419.
 Maleus, island (Mull), i. 68, 216.
 Malisius, bishop of Alban, ii. 329.
 Mamgarvia moor in Moray, i. 479.
 Mamore, district of, i. 411.
 Man, Isle of, subjected to Norwegian rule, i. 345;
   the Danes in, 347;
   the island a bone of contention between the two, 376 _seq_.;
   some time in possession of the Scots, finally passes to the English
      crown, iii. 9;
   office of the Toshiagh Jioarey, 279.
 Manau (Manann), boundaries of the district in Scotland so called, i.
    131, 238, 254;
   battle of, 161;
   Picts of, rise against their Saxon rulers, but are defeated, ᚬv1
      270ᚬ;
   attacked by Muredach of Dalriada, who is defeated by Angus’s brother
      at Carriber, ᚬv1 290-91ᚬ.
 Manx tongue, the, i. 193;
   not understood by the Irish, 199.
 Maor (Mair) of fee, iii. 279, 280.
 Mar, district of, i. 281, 341;
   Donald, mormaer of, slain, ᚬv1 387-8ᚬ;
   Mar and Buchan, one of the seven provinces, iii. 43, 46;
   earldom of, 68;
   historic sketch of, 291.
 Mar, earl of, authenticity of the letters-patent said to have been
    granted to him in 1171, examined, iii. 441.
 Marcellus Ulpius, i. 79.
 Marcus, Emperor, slain by Gratian, i. 108.
 Margaret, daughter of Alexander III., and her daughter the Maid of
    Norway, i. ᚬv1 496-7ᚬ.
 Margaret, St., wife of Malcolm III. (Ceannmor), i. ᚬv1 414-16ᚬ, ᚬv1
    432ᚬ;
   her death, 433;
   character of, ii. 344;
   her reforms in the church, ᚬv2 346-50ᚬ;
   her demeanour to the Anchorites, 351;
   rebuilds the monastery of Iona, 352;
   her relics enshrined at Dunfermline, 491; iii. 81.
 Marianus Scotus, _Chronicle of_, i. 398, 403, 407.
 Martin, St., of Tours, church of Candida Casa dedicated to, ii. 3,
    49.
 Maserfelth. _See_ Cocboy.
 Mathesons, clan, iii. 354, 365, 485.
 Maxima Cæsariensis, a Roman province in Britain, i. 96, 97,
    103.
 Maximian, Galerius, associated with Diocletian in the empire, i. ᚬv1
    92ᚬ, 93.
 Maximus, Clemens, proclaimed Emperor in Britain, i. 104;
   Gratian slain by him in Gaul, and he himself defeated and slain by
      the emperor Theodosius, at Aquileia, 105.
 May, Isle of, St. Adrian and those who accompanied him, slain there by
    the Danes, i. 321; ii. 312.
 Mearns. _See_ Moerne.
 Medraud, son of Llew of Lothian, i. 154.
 Meicen. _See_ Hatfield.
 Melbrigda Tönn, a Scottish jarl, slain by Sigurd, i. ᚬv1 336-7ᚬ.
 Melrose (Mailros), monastery at, i. 133; ii. 200;
   _Chronicle of_, quoted, iii. 65.
 Menmuir, dedication to St. Aidan at, i. 260;
   thanage of, iii. 265.
 Menteith and Stratherne, province of, i. 211, 340, 342;
    iii. 43, 46;
   historic sketch of the earldom of, 290.
   _See_ Fortrenn.
 Mercia, kingdom of, i. 239, 243.
 Mertæ, a northern tribe, i. 76, 206.
 Miathi (? = Mæatæ), the, battle of, by Aidan, i. 161;
   locality of, v1.
 Miledh (Milesius), legend of the sons of, i. 174 _seq_.; iii. 108;
   the Milesians a variety of the Gadhelic branch of the Celtic race,
      and known as Scots after fourth century, i. 227.
 _Milites_, knights, status of, in the tribe, iii. 239-40.
 Minvircc (stone so called), Britons defeated by the Dalriads at, i. ᚬv1
    273ᚬ.
   _See_ Clach na Breatan.
 Modan, St., notice of, ii. 282.
 Moddan, nominated earl of Caithness by King Duncan, slain by Thorkell
    Fostri, i. 401, 402.
 Moerne, Men of, i. 342, 380, 383;
   province of, iii. 42, 46, 122.
 Moinenn, St. (Monenna, Monanus), notice of, ii. 37, ᚬv2 311-314ᚬ.
 Molaga, St., bed of, ii. 304.
 Molaise, the monastic order of, founded by Ragnall, son of Somerled,
    iii. 400.
 Mona (Anglesea), i. 32, 43.
 Monarchy, the idea of, a legacy of Rome to Britain, i. 121.
 Monarina, island of (Arran), i. 68, 69.
 Monastery, the primitive Irish, ii. 57;
   monastic element introduced into the organisation of the church, ᚬv2
      41ᚬ;
   derived from Gaul, 45;
   reached the Irish Church through two different channels, 45;
   monastic family described, 61;
   island monasteries, 62;
   monasteries, Christian colonies, 63;
   privilege of sanctuary, 65;
   seminaries of instruction, 75;
   monastic church affected by two opposite influences—secular clergy,
      227,
     and anchoretical life, ᚬv2 233-39ᚬ;
   literature of, 422;
   monastic orders of church of Rome introduced in the native church,
      392;
   and monasteries founded by feudal kings, iii. 12.
 Moncrieffe (_Monaigh Craebi_), in Perthshire, battle at, i. 288.
 Monifieth (Monyfoth), thanage of, iii. 263, 267.
 Monikie (_Monichi_, _Moneclatu_), church of, dedicated to St. Andrew,
    i. ᚬv1 297-8ᚬ.
 Montrose (Old Monros), thanage of, iii. 265.
 Monzievaird (_Moeghavard_), in Stratherne, i. ᚬv1 383-4ᚬ; iii. 270.
 Moray (_Moravia_, _Myrhaevi_, _Moreb_), district of, i. 241, ᚬv1
    381ᚬ, 396, 402;
   invaded by Malcolm, son of Donald, 360;
   Finlaic, mormaer of, 375, 389;
   bishopric of, ii. ᚬv2 368-370ᚬ;
   historical sketch of the thanage of, iii. 249;
   earldom of, 287;
   chartulary of, 312;
   men of, 365;
   legendary descent of, 476.
 Morgan (Mackays), clan, iii. 330.
 Morkere, Earl, i. 418.
 Mormaers, rulers of provinces in the eleventh century, iii. 49, 303;
   termed Jarls by the Norwegians, 54.
 Morphie, thanage of, iii. 261.
 Mortuath. _See_ Tribe.
 Mount, St. Michael’s, i. 166.
 Mountain chains (_see_ Cheviots, Drumalban, Lowthers, Mounth), their
    importance as landmarks, i. 13.
 Mounth, the, a mountain chain from near Aberdeen to Fort-William, i.
    ᚬv1 10-14ᚬ, 230 _seq_.; iii. 133.
 Moylinny. _See_ Maighline.
 Moyness, thanage of, iii. 248.
 Mugdoch (_Mocetauc_, _Magedauc_), battle at, between the Picts of
    Manann and the Britons, i. 295.
 Mugint, St., i. 136.
 Mull (Mule), isle of, iii. 434;
   townships in, 371.
 Munbre, thanage of, iii. 86, 251.
 Munch, Professor, i. 400, 412.
 Municipal government, a legacy of Rome to Britain, i. 121.
 Muredach Albanach, his address to the river Leven, iii. 117 _seq_.;
   the original of the poem, 454-5.
 Muredach, son of Ainbhceallach, chief of the Cinel Loarn, i. 289.
 Mureif, district of, = Reged, i. 153; iii. 102.
 Mureston Water, i. 249.
 Mynyd Agned (Dineiddyn, Dunedin = Edinburgh), i. 153, 238.
 Myrcforth (Myrcford), Norse term for the Firth of Forth, i. 369.
 Myrhaevi. _See_ Moray.

 Nabarus, river (the Naver), i. 69.
 Naiton, Naitan, king of the Picts. _See_ Nectan.
 Nash, D. W., remarks on his paper on the site of the battle in which
    Penda was slain, i. 255.
 Native-men, iii. 318-321.
 Neachtan (MacNaughton), clan, iii. 331, 499.
 Nechtan’s mere, i. 266.
 Nectan, a Pictish king, restored to life by St. Boethius, i. 135.
 Nectan (Naiton), son of Dereli, king of the Picts, i. 270, ᚬv1
    277-280ᚬ;
   conforms to the Anglican Roman Church, and expels the Columban clergy
      from his kingdom, ᚬv1 283-4ᚬ;
   becomes a cleric, 284;
   bound by Drust, ᚬv1 285-6ᚬ;
   endeavours to regain his crown, 288;
   his death, 289.
 Nectarides, a Count of the maritime tract in Britain, slain by the
    Saxons, i. 99.
 Neill (MacNeill), clan, iii. 331, 430.
 Newburgh (Niwanbyrig), i. 295.
 Niall of Iceland and his sons, i. ᚬv1 377-9ᚬ.
 Niall Mor, iii. 115.
 Nicholas, Pope, i. 413.
 Nicolsons, clan, iii. 461.
 Niduari, the, of Bede = Ptolemy’s Novantæ, i. 133, 238; ii.
    208, 209.
 Nieder Biebr, inscriptions found at, i. 89.
 Niger, C. Pescennius, Emperor, put to death by Severus, i. 80.
 Ninian, St., life and labours of, i. 130; ii. ᚬv2 2-6ᚬ;
   church of, known as Candida Casa, i. 188; ii. 2, ᚬv2
      45-49ᚬ.
   _See_ Church, Whithorn.
 Nith, river (the Novius of Ptolemy), i. 66, 133.
 Nordereys (Northern Islands—Orkney and Shetland) and Sudreys (the
    Western Islands), iii. 28, 29;
   Hill Burton’s mistake as to these, i. 495.
 Norman Castles first built in David the First’s reign, i. 465;
    iii. 12.
 Normandykes, on the Dee, camp at, i. 87.
 Norris, Mr., on the mutual intelligibility of Breton and Cornish, i.
    199.
 Northumbria, kingdom of (_see_ Ida, Aedilfrid, Aeduin, Osuald, Osuiu,
    Ecgfrid, Eadberct, Osulf);
   invasions of, by kings of Alban, i. 372;
   invaded by the Danes, 332;
   attacked by Aethelstan, 351 _seq_.;
   vicissitudes under Eadmund and Eadred, ᚬv1 363-4ᚬ;
   the kingdom becomes an earldom, 364;
   is divided into two earldoms, 369;
   is invaded five times by Malcolm Ceannmor, 417 _seq_.;
   Scottish church of, 258; ii. ᚬv2 154-166ᚬ.
 Norway, Maid of, i. 497.
 Norwegia and Dacia, districts occupied by Norwegians and Danes, i. ᚬv1
    395-6ᚬ.
 Norwegians (_see also_ Danes), first irruptions of, on the British
    coasts (A.D. 793) i. 302 _seq_.; iii. 18;
   association with the Gallwegians, i. 311 (_see_ Gallgaidhel);
   conflict with Danes, 327;
   their invasions of Alban in Constantin’s reign, 339, 347.
   _See_ Imhair Ua Imhair, Regnwald.
 Novantæ, promontory of the (Mull of Galloway), i. 66;
   tribe of the, and their towns, 72, 127.
 Nrurim, Aed, king of the Picts, slain at, by his own people, i. ᚬv1
    328ᚬ.

 Oan (Eugein), king of the Britons, i. 250, 271.
 Obeyn (Aboyne), thanage of, iii. 86, 256.
 Ocha, battle of, i. 25, 139, 180; ii. 46; iii. 120.
 Octa and Ebissa’s colony, i. 147;
   war with, 152 _seq_.
 O’Curry, Professor, i. 2.
 O’Donovan, Dr., i. 2, 199.
 O’Duibhn (Campbells), iii. 330, 458.
 Oestrymnides, a name applied to the Cassiterides, i. 168.
 Oikell, river, i. 337.
 Olaf. _See_ Anlaf, Amlaiph.
 Olaf Ketilson, i. 377.
 Olaf the White. _See_ Amlaimh.
 Olaf Tryggvesson, the first Christian king of Norway, i. 386.
 Olave, son of Godred Crovan, rules Western Isles forty years, i. ᚬv1
    443ᚬ.
 O’Neill, thanage of, iii. 256.
 Oransay, isle of, iii. 438.
 Orcades, the (Orkney Islands), i. 35;
   taken possession of by the Roman fleet, 57.
 Orcas, promontory of (Dunnet Head), i. 31, 68.
 Ordas, a name of Lewis, i. ᚬv1 395-6ᚬ.
 Ordovices, a British tribe, i. 35;
   defeated by Agricola, 43.
 _Orkneyinga Saga_, i. ᚬv1 336-7ᚬ, 375, 389, 390;
   quoted, iii. 54;
   cited, 448.
 Orkneys, the, Saxons form their headquarters there in A.D. 369, i. ᚬv1
    101ᚬ, 130;
   laid waste in 682 by Bruidhe, 263;
   Norwegian earldom of Orkney founded, ᚬv1 335-7ᚬ;
   the earls and their exploits, 374 _seq_., 386, 388,
      401; iii. 8.
   _See_ Caithness, Orcades.
 Orr, loch, Roman remains on, i. 74.
 Orrea, a town of the Vernicomes, i. 74.
 Osbryht, king of Northumbria, slain, i. 332.
 Osfrid, son of Aeduin, i. 243.
 Oshern, son of Siward, i. 408.
 Osirsdaill, Ottersdaill, forest of, iii. 429, 430.
 Oslac, an earl of Northumbria, i. 368.
 Osred, son of Aldfrid of Northumbria, i. 270.
 Osric, son of Aelric, i. 244;
   his son, Osuini, 253.
 Ostorius (Publius), appointed Roman governor of Britain, i. 36,
    37.
 Osuald, son of Aedilfrid, king of Northumbria (A.D. 634-42), i. ᚬv1
    244-6ᚬ; ii. 159;
   his reign, i. ᚬv1 251-2ᚬ; ii. 155 _seq_.;
   slain by Penda, i. 252.
 Osuald the Patrician, i. 304.
 Osuiu (Oswy), his reign as king of Northumbria (A.D. 642-70), i. ᚬv1
    252-260ᚬ; ii. 163, 200, 207;
   his death, i. 260.
 Osulf, king of Northumbria (A.D. 758), i. 300;
   disorganisation of the kingdom at his death, 331.
 Osulf, name of different earls of Northumbria, i. 368, 418.
 Oswestry (Oswaldstree), battle of Cocboy fought at, in which Osuald was
    slain by Penda, i. 252.
 Oswine, one of Ethelwald’s generals, i. 300.
 Otadeni (Otalini), tribe of the, i. 71;
   their territory, 106, 218, 237.
 Othlyn (Gethlyn, Getling), the plains of, mentioned as the scene of the
    battle of Brunanburg, i. 359.
 Ottir, a Danish earl, slain at Tynemoor, i. ᚬv1 347-8ᚬ.
 Outer Hebrides. _See_ Long Island.
 Ovania, probably Strathaven, i. 295.
 Owen (Eugenius the Bald), son of Domnall, sub-king of Cumbria, slain,
    i. ᚬv1 393-4ᚬ.
 Owin (Eugenius, Eaoin), king of the Cumbrians, put to flight by
    Aethelstan, i. 352.

 Pabba, isle of, iii. 431.
 Palgrave, Sir Francis, his work on Scottish Affairs quoted, iii. 444.
 Palladius, St., notices of his life and labours, ii. 26 _seq_.
 Patrick, St., mentioned, i. 121, 136, 140;
   analysis of the ‘Lives’ of, ii. ᚬv2 14-17ᚬ, ᚬv2 427-443ᚬ;
   sketch of his life and labours, ᚬv2 17-25ᚬ.
 Paulinus, missionary among the Angles of Northumbria, i. 240, ᚬv1
    244ᚬ; ii. 154.
 Pecthelm, bishop in Candida Casa, i. 275; ii. 222.
 Pedigrees, Book of, iii. 163.
 Pedigrees in the Irish MSS., analysis of, iii. 338;
   of the Campbells, 339;
   the Macleods, 340;
   descendants of Colla Uais and Somerled, 340;
   of Hy Neill, 340;
   of the earls of Lennox and Mar, 341;
   of the clans among the Dalriadic Scots, 341;
   of the descendants of Cormac mac Airbertach, 344;
   artificial character of these pedigrees, 346;
   compilation of spurious pedigrees, 349;
   result of analysis, 364.
   _See_ Clans, Genealogies.
 Pelagian heresy, breaking out of the, i. 149.
 Penda, king of Mercia, joins Caedwalla in attacking Northumbria, i. ᚬv1
    243ᚬ;
   slays Osuald at Cocboy, 252;
   and thereafter ravages Northumbria, ᚬv1 253-54ᚬ;
   slain by Osuiu, 254.
 Penny lands defined, iii. 226.
 Pentir. _See_ Kintyre.
 Pentland, a corruption of Petland or Pictland, i. 131, 223;
   the Pentland hills the southern boundary of the debateable lands, ᚬv1
      238ᚬ, 247, 249; iii. 277.
 Pentland Firth, i. 402.
 Perth, combat of two clans on North Inch of, iii. 310.
 Peter, St., church of, at Wearmouth, i. 421;
   churches dedicated to, amongst the Picts, ii. 233.
 Peterborough, monastery of, ii. 244.
 Petilius Cerealis, a Roman governor in Britain, i. 39.
 Pharlane, clan, iii. 329, 365.
 Phoceans, the, of Marseilles, i. 29, 30.
 Phœnicians: their intercourse with the British Isles, i. 29, ᚬv1
    30ᚬ.
 Phrissones. _See_ Frisians.
 _Pictish Chronicle_, a work of the tenth century, i. 133, ᚬv1
    134ᚬ, 185;
   its first application of the term ‘Scotti’ to the Picts, 328.
 Pictish language, remains of, i. 501.
 Pictish legend of Cruithe and his seven sons, i. 281.
 Pictish and Cumbrian territories, foreign elements introduced among
    population of, iii. 20;
   spread of Teutonic element over, 21.
 Picts: first appearance of the independent British tribes under this
    name, i. 94, 97;
   twofold division of, the Dicalidonæ and the Vecturiones, 99, ᚬv1
      129ᚬ;
   origin of the name from the practice of painting their bodies, ᚬv1
      128ᚬ, 129;
   their Welsh name Gwyddyl Ffichti, 197, 343;
   their incursions, along with Scots and Saxons, into the Roman
      province, 105 _seq_.;
   their history traced, ᚬv1 123-137ᚬ;
   division into Northern and Southern Picts, and the districts occupied
      by them respectively, 130, 230 _seq_.;
   mission of St. Ninian to the Southern Picts (_c_. A.D. 397), ᚬv1
      130ᚬ; ii. 3;
   Pictish legends, i. ᚬv1 185-189ᚬ; ii. 113; iii. 124-134;
   did they belong either to the Welsh or the Gaelic race? i. ᚬv1
      197-8ᚬ, 226;
   analysis of lists of Pictish kings, and its philological results, ᚬv1
      207-12ᚬ;
   topography of the districts occupied by them, 223, 224;
   differences between the two divisions as to race and language, ᚬv1
      231ᚬ;
   their seat of government, 232;
   peculiarity in the order of succession among their kings, ᚬv1
      232-235ᚬ;
   church of the Southern Picts, ii. 26 _seq_.;
   arrival of St. Columba among the Northern Picts (A.D. 565), _see_
      Columba;
   the Southern Picts subjugated (_c_. A.D. 660) by Osuiu, i. 256
      _seq_.; ii. 207;
   their revolt, i. 260;
   their kingdom invaded by Ecgfrid (A.D. 685), ᚬv1 265-266ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2
      213ᚬ (_see_ Ecgfrid);
   recovery of their independence, i. 267;
   their relations with the Scots of Dalriada at this juncture, ᚬv1
      276-7ᚬ;
   the Picts of Manann (_see_ Manau, Mugdoch), 270, 271, ᚬv1
      295ᚬ;
   legend of St. Bonifacius, 277; ii. 229;
   establishment of Scone as the capital (A.D. 710), i. 280; iii.
      132;
   the seven provinces in the eighth century, i. 280; \ iii. 42-44;
   expulsion of the Columban clergy (A.D. 717), i. ᚬv1 283-84ᚬ, ᚬv1
      315-16ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2 177-78ᚬ;
   revolution, and struggle for supremacy, i. 286;
   battles at Moncrieffe, Scone, Monitcarno, Dromaderg, ᚬv1 288-9ᚬ;
   battle at Circinn in the Mearns (A.D. 752), 295; iii. 123;
   Alpin the Scot attacks the Picts (A.D. 834), and is slain at
      Pitelpie, near Dundee, i. ᚬv1 306-7ᚬ;
   his son Kenneth invades Pictavia five years later, and in another
      five years becomes king of the Picts, i. 308-9, ii. 307;
   discussion of the question as to where the Scots came from who
      accompanied Kenneth, i. ᚬv1 316-322ᚬ.
   _See_ Kenneth Mac Alpin.
 Pinkerton, John, i. 12, 22, 140;
   remarks on his _Enquiry_, 19, 196.
 Pitalpin (Pitelpie), Alpin, father of Kenneth, slain there, i. ᚬv1
    306-7ᚬ.
 Pitmain, on the Spey, Roman remains at, i. 89.
 Pliny, i. 31.
 Pluscarden, Book of, iii. 311 _seq_.
 Polybius, his reference to the British Isles, i. 30.
 Potato culture in the Highlands and Islands, iii. 374.
 Presbyter-abbot, status and jurisdiction, ii. 44.
 Price, Rev. T., on the mutual intelligibility of Welsh and Breton, i.
    199.
 _Principes_, status of, in the tribe, iii. 239.
 Procopius, historian of sixth century—his ignorance of Britain, i. ᚬv1
    115ᚬ, 145.
 Provinces of Scotland under the Picts in the kingdom of Scone, i. ᚬv1
    280ᚬ; iii. 42-44;
   a second list of seven, excluding Caithness and including Argyll, in
      the kingdom of Alban, in the tenth century, i. 340 _seq_.;
      iii. 44-49;
   provincial rulers termed Mormaers in the eleventh century, ᚬv1
      49-56ᚬ;
   Toisechs of Buchan, 56;
   first appearance of seven earls, 58;
   David I.'s feudalising policy, ᚬv1 63-66ᚬ;
   additional earldoms created by subsequent kings of Feudal Scotland,
      66;
   earldom of Mar, 68;
   of Garrioch and Lennox, 69;
   of Ross and Carrick, 70;
   of Caithness, 71;
   the seven earls of Alexander II., 71, 79;
   and of Alexander III., ᚬv1 80-83ᚬ.
 Ptolemy: his description of North Britain, i. ᚬv1 62-70ᚬ;
   and of the tribes and their towns, 70 _seq_.;
   comparative value of the Greek and Latin versions of his _Geography_,
      63, 64.
 Pygmies Kirk, Isle of Lewis, iii. 429.
 Pytheas, a Massilian, his expedition to Britain, i. 30.

 Quarry, clan, legendary descent of, iii. 488.
   _See_ Guaire.
 Qwhewyl, clan, iii. 310, 314.

 Raarsa, isle of, iii. 433.
 Raasay (Rosis), river (now Blackwater), a Scots colony reaches, i. ᚬv1
    183ᚬ, 320.
 Raedykes, near Stonehaven, Roman camp at, i. 87.
 Raedykes, on the Ythan, Roman camp at, i. 87.
 Ragnall (Reginald), second son of Somerled, descendants of, iii. 401;
   espouse the cause of Bruce, 401.
 Ragnall, son of Eoin, his religious gifts, extent of his territories,
    and death, iii. 403.
 Ragnar Lodbrog and his sons, i. 332.
 _Rath_ (homestead) lands, iii. 243.
 Rathelpie (Rathalpin), connected with Alpin, father of Kenneth, i. ᚬv1
    307ᚬ.
 Rathinveramon (near Scone), Donald mac Alpin said to have died at, i.
    322;
   Constantin, son of Cuilean, slain at, 381.
 Rauchlynne, isle of, iii. 439.
 Ravenna, the geographer of, on the Saxons in Britain, i. 148;
   his list of local names, 216, 217.
 Reginald, son of Somerled, iii. 35, 39, 293, 400.
 Reginald, son of Godred Crovan, iii. 35;
   sometimes confounded with Somerled’s son, as both bore the title of
      King of the Isles, 35, 36.
 Regnwald, leader of the last invasion of Alban by the Northmen, i. ᚬv1
    347-349ᚬ, 373.
 Regulus, St., legend of, and the relics of St. Andrew, i. ᚬv1 297-8ᚬ.
 Rerigonium, a town of the Novantæ, on Loch Ryan—its fortified moat, i.
    72, 132.
 Rerigonius Bay (Loch Ryan), i. 66.
 Retaliation and fine, in the tribe, iii. 152, 204, 217.
 Restennet (Restinoth), church of, i. 278; iii. 262.
 Reuda, leader of the Scots who came from Ireland, i. 138, ᚬv1
    139ᚬ.
 Richard of Cirencester, the work attributed to him, _De situ
    Britanniæ_, entirely spurious, i. 22, 74, 76, ᚬv1
    102ᚬ, 103.
 Ricsig, king of Northumbria, i. 332.
 Rigmonath (St. Andrews), i. 183.
 Robertson, E. W., i. 12;
   his _Scotland under her Early Kings_, 19; iii. 62.
 Robertson, Dr. Joseph, i. 333;
   on the Mar letters-patent, iii. 443.
 Rognwald, earl of Maeri, i. 335, 344.
 Roland, lord of Galloway, i. 345.
 Romans in Britain: Julius Cæsar’s invasion, i. 31;
   formation of a province, called Britannia Romana, in the reign of
      Claudius, 33, 34;
   progress of the Roman arms, 34;
   extent of the province at the time of Agricola’s arrival, 41,
      42;
   his campaigns (_see_ Agricola);
   arrival of the Emperor Hadrian, 60;
   first wall between the Forth and Clyde—the province established, ᚬv1
      76ᚬ;
   irruptions on the province by the northern tribes in A.D. 162 and
      182, 79;
   the province divided by Severus into two, Upper and Lower Britain,
      81;
   campaign of Severus, 82 _seq_.;
   peace made with the barbarian tribes by his son Antoninus, 90,
      91;
   history silent for seventy years, 92;
   ten years’ independence under Carausius and Allectus, ᚬv1 92-95ᚬ;
   war of Constantius Chlorus, 94, 95;
   commencement of systematic inroads of the barbarian tribes into the
      province, 95;
   rapid development of wealth and civilisation, 96;
   division into four provinces, 96, 97;
   invasion of the province by Picts and Scots, 97,
     who were afterwards joined by the Saxons and the Attacotti, ᚬv1
        98-100ᚬ;
   restoration of the province by Theodosius, ᚬv1 100-104ᚬ;
   usurpation of Maximus, 104;
   his withdrawal of the Roman troops, and renewed incursions of the
      Picts and Scots, 105;
   a legion sent by Stilicho to garrison the northern wall, 105,
      106;
   the legion withdrawn, and the province again devastated, 106;
   the invaders again repelled by Stilicho, and the army restored, ᚬv1
      107ᚬ;
   troubled state of the empire till the abandonment (A.D. 410) of the
      imperial authority over Britain, ᚬv1 107-112ᚬ.
 Roman remains in Scotland, i. 44 _seq_., 49, 71 _seq_.,
    ᚬv1 86-88ᚬ.
 Roman roads in Scotland, i. ᚬv1 86-89ᚬ.
 Roman walls in Britain: that of Hadrian, between the Tyne and the
    Solway, i. 60, 61;
   that of Antoninus, between the Forth and the Clyde, ᚬv1 77-79ᚬ;
   its reconstruction by Severus, 81, 89;
   examination of differing opinions on the walls, ᚬv1 89-91ᚬ.
 Romb, isle of, iii. 434.
 Romwrche, Ness of (Point of Ardnamurchan), iii. 428.
 Rona, isle of, iii. 431.
 Ronan, St., notice of, ii. 282.
 Root-words peculiar to the topography of the Pictish districts, i. ᚬv1
    223-4ᚬ.
   _See_ Topography.
 Rosemarkie, a Columban foundation, i. 320.
 Rosnat, monastery of, ii. 48.
 Ross, province of, i. 319;
   bishopric of, ii. 377;
   earldom of, iii. 70;
   historic sketch of, 290, 364;
   Mairi, countess of, 408.
 Rosses of Balnagown, MS. history of, quoted, iii. 355.
 Rosses, clan. _See_ Andres.
 Ross-Foichen. _See_ Feochan.
 Roth, battle of, i. ᚬv1 247-8ᚬ.
 Roy’s (General) _Military Antiquities_, i. 22, 51.
 Run, king of the Strathclyde Britons, a son-in-law of Kenneth mac
    Alpin, i. 313, 325.
 Runrig defined, iii. 380.
 _Rustici_, class in the tribe so called, iii. 218, 219, 244.
 Rutupiæ (Richborough), i. 100.
 Ryan, loch, i. 72, 108, 292.
 Rydderch Hael, king of Strathclyde, ii. 179.

 Sabrina (Severn) river, i. 35.
 Saddle, Cistercian monks established at, ii. 415;
   Ragnall, son of Somerled, establishes a monastery of grey friars at,
      iii. 400.
 St. Abb’s Head, ii. 201.
 St. Andrews, foundation of, i. 296;
   legends relating to, ᚬv1 296-298ᚬ; ii. ᚬv2 261-275ᚬ;
   church of, becomes the national church of the Picts, i. 299;
   is the chief seat of the Scottish Church in the time of Constantin,
      son of Aedh, and its bishops become known as bishops of Alban, ᚬv1
      340ᚬ; ii. 324;
   primacy transferred to, 323;
   rights of the Keledei pass to the bishopric of, 372.
   _See also_ Andrew, St.
 St. Cyrus, i. 334.
   _See_ Grig, Eglisgirg.
 St. Fillans, parish of, ii. 33.
 St. Kilda, native fort in, i. 185.
 St. Michael’s Mount, i. 166.
 St. Monans (Inverry), churches of, founded in honour of St. Moinenn,
    bishop of Clonfert, ii. ᚬv2 314-16ᚬ.
 Sanctuary, privilege of, claimed by monasteries, ii. 65.
 _Saxon Chronicle_ quoted, iii. 58.
 Saxon shore, the, i. 150, 151.
 Saxonia, name given to the northern part of Northumbria, i. 346,
    369, 372, 385.
 Saxons, first appearance of the, i. 92;
   join with the Picts, Scots, and Attacotts in ravaging the Roman
      province, 99;
   in Orkney, 101;
   their settlement in Britain, as given by Gildas, 144, 145,
     Procopius, 145,
     Nennius, 146,
     and Bede, ᚬv1 148-150ᚬ;
   testimony of Prosper Aquitanus, 152;
   the twelve battles of Arthur, ᚬv1 152-154ᚬ;
   legends regarding the original home of those who settled in Britain,
      ᚬv1 189-192ᚬ, 227.
 Scapa, isle of, iii. 434.
 Scarba, isle of, i. 69; iii. 438.
 Scilly Islands. _See_ Cassiterides.
 Scolocs, functions of, ii. 446; iii. 260.
 Scone (Caislen or Castellum Credi), establishment of, as the Pictish
    capital, i. 280; iii. 132;
   battle at, i. 288;
   Kenneth Mac Alpin, the first king who gave the kingdom of Scone to
      the Gaidheal, 313 _seq_.;
   priory of, founded, ii. 374;
   thanage of, iii. 275, 276.
 Scotch language. _See_ Languages.
 Scoti, originally used to designate the inhabitants of Ireland, i. ᚬv1
    137ᚬ _seq_.;
   their first historical appearance in Britain (A.D. 360), 97;
      iii. 124-5;
   the districts occupied by them, i. ᚬv1 98-100ᚬ;
   join with Picts, Saxons, and Attacotti in attacking the Roman
      province, but are at last driven back, ᚬv1 100-110ᚬ, 139;
      iii. 124-5;
   establish a colony in Argyll (A.D. 498), i. ᚬv1 139-144ᚬ, 248;
      [in iii. 125, _l_. 20, _for_ sixth _read_ fifth] (_see_ Dalriada,
      Erc);
   legendary history, 97 _seq_.;
   notices of, by Nennius and Bede, i. 138,
     and by the Roman writers, 139;
   their language, 193;
   notices of the Scots till the reign of Kenneth Mac Alpin, ᚬv1 291-2ᚬ,
      316;
   they rule as kings of the Picts, ᚬv1 322-334ᚬ,
     and eventually became, as kings of Alban and of Scotia, kings of
        the whole territory of Scotland, ᚬv1 335-433ᚬ.
   _See_ Miledh, Picts.
 Scotia:
   the name not applied to any part of the present Scotland before the
      tenth century, i. 1, 398;
   applied first to Ireland (A.D. 580) by Isidore of Seville, ᚬv1 2-4ᚬ,
      115;
   by ‘Scottia’ Bede invariably means Ireland, v1;
   Scotland then included in the term Britannia or Britain, 1;
   the country north of the Forth and Clyde known to the Romans as
      Caledonia, called also Alban and Albania, 1, 2;
   as applied to Scotland, Scotia a name superinduced on the older one
      of Alban, 3, 4;
   boundaries of the district in Scotland to which the name Scotia was
      applied from the tenth to the twelfth or thirteenth century, ᚬv1
      2ᚬ, 3, 5, 6;
   extension of the application of the term, 2, 3;
   light thrown by the changes in its application on the changes in the
      race and position of the inhabitants, ᚬv1 5-7ᚬ;
   physical features of the country, ᚬv1 7-9ᚬ;
   mountain chains and rivers, ᚬv1 9-14ᚬ;
   the debateable lands, ᚬv1 14-16ᚬ;
   five distinct periods in its early history, 16,
     during three of which Scotland was purely Celtic, 17;
   changes during the two last periods, 17;
   critical examination of authorities on its early history, ᚬv1 18-22ᚬ;
   questionable or spurious authorities, ᚬv1 22-26ᚬ;
   plan of the present work, ᚬv1 26-28ᚬ.
 Scotland:
   campaigns of Agricola in, ᚬv1 43-60ᚬ (_see_ Agricola);
   the Roman province, ᚬv1 62-111ᚬ (_see_ Romans);
   early connection between Ireland and, iii. 125;
   true commencement of Feudal Scotland under David I., i. 459;
   consolidation of the provinces completed under Alexander III., iii.
      1;
   southern frontier of, 3;
   northern boundary of, 7;
   physical aspect of, 9;
   old descriptions of, 11-14;
   population of, at this time, 15, 135 _seq_.;
   indigenous races of, and their possessions, 16;
   colonising races, 17;
   intruding races, 18;
   influence of foreign races, 18;
   foreign elements introduced, 20;
   spread of Teutonic element and influence, 21-27;
   Religious Houses in (A.D. 1272), ii. 509;
   _communitas_, or estates of, in 1283, iii. 39;
   population distinguished as Lowlanders and Highlanders, 40;
   the seven provinces of, in the eighth century, 42;
   in the tenth century, 44;
   districts ruled by kings and afterwards by Mormaers, 49;
   petty kings of Argyll and Galloway, 51;
   sources of information as to the early social state of the
      population, 136;
   description of the Isles, with their pertinents and pendicles
      (written 1577-95), 428-40.
 Scots and Picts, character of the paganism of the, ii. ᚬv2 108-118ᚬ;
   no affinity with the Druidism of Gaul, 118;
   twofold division of the Scots in Ireland, paralleled in the
      establishment of the Pictish kingdom at Scone, iii. 132.
 Scottish Church. _See_ Church.
 Scott, Sir Walter, on the Culloden Papers, iii. 327;
   on the Highland Clans, 456.
 Scribes, first appearance of, in the monasteries, ii. 423.
 Sealbach, son of Fearchar Fada, i. ᚬv1 272-3ᚬ;
   slays his brother Ainbhceallach, 284;
   becomes a cleric, 285.
 Secular clergy, influence of, in the monastic church, ii. ᚬv2 227-33ᚬ;
   order of secular canons instituted, 241.
 Segine, third abbot of Iona, i. 245;
   two important events under his presidency, ii. 154 _seq_.
 Seguise, battle of, between Garnaid and the family of Nechtan, i. ᚬv1
    246-7ᚬ.
 Seill, isle of, iii. 438.
 Selden, John, antiquary, iii. 441, 442.
 Selgovæ (Elgovæ), a Brigantian tribe, i. 44;
   towns of, 72.
 Senchus Mor, iii. 177 _seq_.
 Sennachies, Irish, iii. 337.
 Sept, the, in Wales, iii. 205;
   territorial lords, 205;
   law of succession, 205;
   special parties liable for the crimes of its members, 206;
   fosterage, 207.
 Sepulchral remains in Britain: ethnological evidence furnished by, i.
    ᚬv1 169-70ᚬ.
 Serf, St., or Servanus, notice of, ii. 31;
   anachronism in connecting him with St. Kentigern, 184, ᚬv2
      255-258ᚬ;
   he founds an establishment of Keledei, who are hermits, about A.D.
      704, ᚬv2 258-9ᚬ.
 Severus, L. Septimus,—circumstances in which he was proclaimed Emperor,
    i. 79;
   his campaign in Britain, 82 _seq_.;
   wall of, ᚬv1 89-91ᚬ;
   his death at York, 90.
 Sgathaig (Dunscaich), Skye, site of a military school, iii. 128.
 Shetland Islands, colonised by the Norwegians, i. 344; iii. 8, 29.
 Sidlaw hills, i. 266, 382.
 Sigurd made jarl of Orkney, i. 335;
   his burial-place, 337;
   his successors, 344.
 Sigurd ‘the Stout,’ son of Hlodver, Norwegian earl of Orkney, i. ᚬv1
    374ᚬ;
   his possessions on the mainland, 375;
   narrative of his war expeditions, ᚬv1 376-9ᚬ;
   slain at Cluantarbh, in Ireland’s final conflict with the Danes, ᚬv1
      386ᚬ, 388;
   his sons, 401.
 Silura, island of,—Cornwall so called by Strabo, i. 167.
 Silures, a British tribe, i. 35, 167, 226.
 Simal, son of Drust, i. ᚬv1 285-6ᚬ.
 Simeon of Durham, i. 294;
   account of the attack of the Northmen on the Northumbrian coast (A.D.
      793-94), 303;
   on the battle in A.D. 1006 between the men of Alban and Saxonia, ᚬv1
      385ᚬ.
 Sitriuc, son of Imhair, leader of a Danish invasion of Alban, i. ᚬv1
    338ᚬ;
   king of Deira, 351.
 Siward, earl of Northumbria, i. 407;
   invades Scotland, 408;
   death of, 410, 418.
 Skidamyre, in Caithness, battle at, i. 375.
 Skene, Sir John, his _De Verborum Significatione_, iii. 240 _n_.;
   on the privilege pertaining to the cross of the clan Macduff, 304.
 Skuli, son of Thorfinn, earl of Orkney, i. ᚬv1 374-5ᚬ.
 Skye (Scetis, Scith, Sgithidh), i. 69, 216, 259, ᚬv1
    260ᚬ, 387, 390, 396;
   sheriffdom of, and boundaries, iii. 88, 432.
 Slait, isle of, iii. 432.
 Slaughter, fines for, in the tribal system, iii. 151, 204, 217.
 Sluaged, or ‘hosting,’ the burden of, iii. 151, 172, 188, 234.
 Solway Firth: tribes on its northern shore subjugated by Agricola, i.
    43.
   _See_ Galloway.
 Somerled, ‘Regulus’ of Arregaithel, invades Scotland with the sons of
    Malcolm mac Eth, i. 469;
   treats with Malcolm IV., 471;
   drives the Norwegians out of the mainland, and conquers part of the
      Isles, iii. 33-35;
   again attacks Malcolm, but is defeated, and killed at Renfrew (A.D.
      1164), i. 473; iii. 35;
   his three sons and their possessions, 35, 39, 293, 400.
 Sorley, clan, iii. 474.
 Spey river, i. 336, ᚬv1 341-2ᚬ;
   anciently the boundary between Scotia and Moravia, 13, 14;
   battle on, 288.
 Stamford bridge, battle of, i. 413.
 Standard, battle of the, iii. 5.
 Stanmore, i. 369.
 Steelbow tenancy, iii. 243, 283, 370.
 Stewart, John, of Appin, iii. 436.
 Stilicho, a Roman general, repels on different occasions the Picts and
    Scots, i. 105 _seq_.
 Stone altars, i. 283, 370.
 Stone coffins found at the Mire of Dunnichen, i. 266.
 Strabo: notices of the British Isles and their inhabitants in his
    _Geography_, i. ᚬv1 31-33ᚬ, ᚬv1 166-7ᚬ.
 Stræcled Wealas, the Cumbri-Britons of Strathclyde, i. 326; iii.
    197.
   _See_ Alclyde.
 Strageath, Roman camp at, i. 50.
 Strath, battle of, iii. 123.
 Strathardell, iii. 133-4;
   thanage of, 276.
 Strathaven, i. 295.
 Strathcarron, i. ᚬv1 249-50ᚬ.
 Stratherne, district of, i. 211.
   _See_ Fortrenn, Menteith.
 Strenaeshhalc (Whitby), council held at (A.D. 664), i. 259; ii.
    165.
 Struin (Strowan), thanage of, iii. 87, 270.
 Stuart, Dr. John, ii. 310, 317, 448; iii. 58.
 Stuart’s (R.) _Caledonia Romana_, i. 23.
 Succession, law of, among the Picts, i. ᚬv1 232-4ᚬ, 315, 323.
 Suibhne, fourth abbot of Iona, ii. 163.
 Sudreys, iii. 29.
   _See_ Western Islands.
 Suetonius Paulinus, a Roman commander in Britain, i. 38.
 Suevi, the. _See_ Vandals.
 Sumarlidi = Summer Wanderers, defeat of their fleet in Buchan, i. ᚬv1
    365ᚬ.
 Sumarlidi, son of Sigurd the Stout, i. 388, 401.
 Sutherlandshire, with Caithness, overrun by the Northmen, i. 326,
    336, 345, 375; iii. 18.
 Swein, king of Denmark, i. 420.
 Sweno’s stone, account of, i. 337-8.

 Tacitus as an historian, i. 27;
   his works referred to, 39, ᚬv1 43-58ᚬ.
 Taexali, promontory of (Kinnaird’s Head), i. 67, 74;
   tribe of the, 74, 206.
 Taliessin, Book of, quoted, iii. 100.
 Talorcan, son of Ainfrit, and nephew of Osuiu of Northumbria, king of
    the Picts, i. 257.
 Talorcan (Talorg), son of Congus, defeated by Brude, son of Angus, i.
    289;
   drowned, 290.
 Talore. _See_ Garnaid.
 Talorgan, son of Drostan, king of Atholl, i. 281;
   bound by Angus, 290.
 Talorgan, son of Fergus, defeats the Dalriads at Carriber, i. 291;
   slain at Mugdoch, 295.
 Talorgan, son of Wthoil, joint king of the Picts with Drest, son of
    Constantin, i. 306.
 Talorgen, son of Angus, king of the Picts, i. 301.
 Tamea, a town of the Vacomagi, i. 75.
 Tamworth taken by storm, i. 361.
 Tanistry, law of, i. 323.
 Tannadyce, thanage of, iii. 262, 264.
 Taran, son of Entefidich, king of the Picts, i. ᚬv1 269-70ᚬ.
 Tarbet, in Easter Ross, St. Aidan patron saint of, i. 260.
 Tarvedrum (the Orcas promontory—Dunnet Head), i. 68.
 Tatooing, practice of, among the Caledonians, i. 83, 106, ᚬv1
    128ᚬ.
 Tava (Tavaus) estuary (Firth of Tay), i. 66, 216.
 Tay (Toe) river, a formidable barrier to the Romans and Angles, i. ᚬv1
    14ᚬ;
   estuary of, reached by Agricola, probably by way of Stirling and
      Perth, 45;
   his fleet afterwards in the Firth, 49.
 Taylor, Rev. Isaac, on _Words and Places_, i. 220 _seq_.
 _Taymouth, Black Book of_, iii. 319 _seq_.
 Tees, river, i. 236, 369, 420.
 Teith, river, i. 261.
 Tenures of land, old Celtic, gradually give way before feudal forms, iii. 236.
   _See_ Land-tenure.
 Termon lands, ii. 321; iii. 168-9.
 Ternan, St., notice of, 29-32.
 Teudubr, son of Bile, king of Alclyde, i. 295.
 Teutones, the, i. ᚬv1 192-194ᚬ;
   make settlements in Britain, 227; iii. 21.
 Thanage, the, iii. 85-87;
   definition of, 245;
   status of thanes, 239;
   thanages converted into baronies, 246;
   historical sketch of the, 247-277;
   they replace the Tuath, 281;
   general extent, 282-3.
 Thanet, isle of, Saxons in, i. 146, 150.
 Theodosius the elder sent to Britain, his restoration of the province,
    i. ᚬv1 99-103ᚬ, 141.
 Theodosius the younger becomes Emperor, i. 104.
 Thorfinn ‘the Skull-cleaver,’ son of Einar, Norwegian earl of
    Orkney,—his wife Grelauga and their sons, i. ᚬv1 374-5ᚬ.
 Thorfinn, son of Sigurd the Stout, by the daughter of Malcolm II., i.
    386, 389;
   war between him and his cousin Duncan, king of Scotia, 401
      _seq_.; iii. 31, 52, 54.
   _See_ Caithness, Ingibiorg.
 Thorkell Fostri, leader of the Orkneymen in the war between Thorfinn
    and Duncan, i. ᚬv1 401-2ᚬ.
   _See_ Thorfinn, son of Sigurd.
 Thorkell, Jarl, i. 420.
 Thorstein the Red (Ostin), attacks the northern provinces of Scotland,
    i. ᚬv1 326-7ᚬ, 336.
 Thule, the name, i. 41;
   Roman fleet in sight of the island, 57;
   applied by Claudian to Caledonia, 101, 130.
 Thurnam, Dr., i. ᚬv1 169-70ᚬ.
 Tighernac, i. 26 _et passim_.
 Tin mines of Britain, i. 29, 165 _seq_.
 Tina, river (Eden), i. 66, 216.
 Tiree (Tierhie), isle of, iii. 345, 437;
   monasteries in, ii. ᚬv2 128-30ᚬ.
 Toe (the Tay), battle on, between the men of Alban, i. 381.
 Topography, evidence furnished by, as to the languages of the tribes,
    i. ᚬv1 212-225ᚬ;
   and as to the divisions of land, iii. 225.
 Toragh (Tory Island, off coast of Donegal), plundered, i. ᚬv1 289-90ᚬ.
 Torfnes, Norse name of Burghead, i. 336, 403.
 Toshach or Toisech, a leader in the ancient Celtic Tuath, iii. 156
    _seq_.;
   the Toschachdor and Toschachdera, officers at a later period in the
      Highlands and Islands, 278-281;
   description of their offices, which were called Toschachdoracht and
      Toschachderacht, 279, 300-302.
 Toshiagh Jioarey (Manx), definition, iii. 279, 280.
 Tostig, son of Earl Godwine, appointed earl of Northumbria by king
    Edward, i. 410, 418;
   his earldom ravaged by Malcolm Ceannmor, ᚬv1 413-4ᚬ.
 Townships in the Highlands and Islands subsequent to the sixteenth
    century, described, iii. 369;
   mode of occupation, 370;
   in the central Highlands, 370;
   in the Islands, 371;
   enlargement of, 373;
   in Inner Hebrides, 347;
   in Outer Hebrides, 378;
   townlands, 379;
   mode of division, 380.
   _See_ Long Island.
 Train, Joseph, iii. 279-80.
 Transmarine Scotland, application of the term, iii. 42, 104.
 Tribe, the, in Scotland, iii. 209;
   early notices of, in Greek and Roman writers, 209-10;
   the tribe among the Picts, 210;
   in Dalriada, 212;
   in Galloway, 214;
   modified by external influences, 214;
   transition of the mortuath into the earldom, and the tribe into the
      thanage, 215;
   distinction of the people into free and servile classes, 216;
   fines exigible from freeman class, 217;
   different ranks of bondmen, 220-3;
   land measures, variously denominated, 223;
   burdens on land, 228-234;
   gradual assimilation to feudal forms, 236;
   Crown lands held in feu-farm, 237;
   ranks of society on crown-lands, 238.
   _See_ Cain, Feacht, Sluaged, Waytinga.
   Tribe, the, in Wales, iii. 197;
   division of land, 198, 200;
   indications of an earlier tribal system, 198;
   land measurement, 200;
   the _Alltudion_ analogous to the Irish _Fuidhir_, 200;
   rights of the free members, 203;
   burdens on land and its possessors, 203;
   fines for slaughter or injuries, 204.
   _See_ Sept.
 Tribruit, river, i. 153.
 Trimontium, a town of the Selgovæ, i. 72.
 Trouternes, isle of, iii. 432.
 Trumuin, bishop of the Picts who were subject to the Angles, i. ᚬv1
    262ᚬ;
   his flight from Abercorn, 133, 268; ii. 214.
 Trusty’s Hill, in Galloway, remains of a vitrified wall on, i. 136.
 Tuath or Tribe in Ireland, iii. 135;
   definition of the term, 136;
   influences affecting the tribe, 137;
   effect of Christianity upon, 138;
   land originally held in common, 139;
   distinction of ranks, 139;
   the _Ri_ or king, his authority and privileges, 140-2;
   distinctions arising from possession of cattle, 142-44;
   origin and growth of private property, and creation of territorial
      chiefs, 144-5;
   the ceile or tenants of a chief, 145-7;
   condition of the territory, 147;
   the dun or fort, 148;
   the mortuath or great tribe, 149;
   the cuicidh or province, 149;
   law of tanistry, 150;
   tie between superior and dependants, 150;
   fines for injuries, 151;
   honor price or fixed value, 152;
   land measures, 153-157;
   later state of the tribes, 157-70;
   process of internal change, 300.
   _See also_ Finé in Ireland.
 Tuatha de Danaan, the, i. 173 _seq_., 226; iii. 105, 131.
 Tuathal mac Artguso, abbot of Dunkeld and first bishop of Fortrenn,
    head of the Columban Church, ii. 308.
 Tuessis, river (Spey), i. 67;
   a town of the Vacomagi, 74.
 Tuirrin palace, Rescobie, iii. 123.
 Tula Aman, burnt by Ecgfrid, i. 266.
 Tunberct, bishop of the church of Hagustald, i. 262.
 Turner’s _Anglo-Saxons_, i. 151.
 Tuthald, bishop of Alban, ii. 344.
 Tweed, river, i. 241.
 Tyne, river, i. 332.
 Tynemoor, in East Lothian, battle with the Danes at, ᚬv1 347-8ᚬ.
 Tyninghame, monastery of, founded, ii. 223.
 Tytler, Patrick Fraser, his _History of Scotland_, i. 19.

 Uchtred, son of Waltheof, earl of Northumbria in 1006, inflicts a
    disastrous defeat on the Scots under Malcolm, i. 385;
   slain in 1016 by Cnut, 392;
   his daughter Aldgetha and her son Earl Gospatrick, 394, ᚬv1
      419ᚬ.
 Uisneach, sons of, extent of their possessions, iii. 129.
 Uist, island, iii. 387, 393, 430;
   bestowed on the church (A.D. 1440), 408.
 Ulloway, isle of, iii. 436.
 Ulster (Uladh), a district in the north of Ireland inhabited by a
    Pictish people, i. 131, 140.
 _Ulster, Annals of_, i. 26 _et passim_.
 Umphraville, Gilbert de, iii. 80.
 Ungus, son of Uirguist. _See_ Angus, son of Fergus.
 Urien (Urbgen = Cityborn), kingdom of (? Dumbarton), i. 153, ᚬv1
    156ᚬ, 159.
 Urr, moat of, Roman remains on, i. 72.
 Uven, son of Unuist. _See_ Eoganan, son of Angus.
 Uxellum, a town of the Selgovæ, i. 72.

 Vacomagi, a tribe whose territory lay along the Highland Line, i. ᚬv1
    74ᚬ, 75, 127, 206.
 Valentia, a British province, i. 100;
   different opinions as to its position, 102;
   author’s opinion that Wales is meant, 103.
 Vandals, the, with the Alani and Suevi, make irruptions into the Roman
    empire, i, 107, 108.
 Vandogara (Vanduara), a town of the Damnonii, i. 73.
 Varar estuary (Firth of Beauly), i. 67, 75.
 Vecturiones, a division of the Picts, i. 99, 129.
 Vedra, river (the Wear), i. 64.
 Venusio, town of the Brigantes, i. 37.
 Venusius, a British leader, i. 37, 71.
 Veranius, a Roman commander in Britain, i. 38.
 Vernicomes, tribe of the, and its territory, i. 74, 206.
 Veruvium (Noss Head), i. 67.
 Vervedrum (Duncansbay Head), i. 67.
 Vettius Bolanus, a Roman governor in Britain, i. ᚬv1 38-40ᚬ.
 Victoria, a town in Fothreve, i. 74;
   inhabitants of, enrolled by Severus among the Roman auxiliaries, ᚬv1
      89ᚬ.
   _See_ Fothreve.
 Villages, fishing, established in the Highlands and Islands, in 1788,
    iii. 376.
 Vindogara (Ayr) Bay, i. 66, 73.
 Virides, a term applied by Cæsar to the Britons, i. 32.
 Visibsolian, battle at, i. 338.
 Volsas Bay (Loch Broom), i. 69.
 Vuirich, clan, iii. 364.

 Wales, descent of the Scots (from Ireland) on (A.D. 360), i. 97
    _seq_.
   _See_ Tribe in Wales.
 Wallingford, John, his narrative of the cession of Lothian to Kenneth,
    spurious, i. ᚬv1 371-2ᚬ.
 Walls, Roman, in Britain. _See_ Roman walls.
 Wallsend, i. 61.
 Waltheof, a Northumbrian earl, i. 385, 425.
 Wardlaw hill, Roman remains on, i. 72.
 Wardykes, Roman camp at, i. 87.
 Waterford, the Danes in, i. 347.
 Watling Street, a Roman road, i. 86.
 Waytinga, a yearly tax, paid by thanes, iii. 232.
 Wearmouth, i. 421.
 Welsh _Historical Triads_, undoubtedly spurious, i. 23, 24,
    172, 197;
   codes of laws, iii. 197.
 Wendune. _See_ Brunanburg.
 Werid, British name of the Forth, iii. 45.
 Wessex, kings of, their increasing power in the ninth century, i. ᚬv1
    349ᚬ.
 Western Isles (Sudreys) ravaged by Northmen, i. ᚬv1 304-5ᚬ, ᚬv1
    311-12ᚬ;
   colonised by the Norwegians, 345, 376;
   attacked and for a time occupied by the Danes, ᚬv1 378-9ᚬ;
   war between the kings of Norway and Scotland for the possession of
      them (A.D. 1263), 492;
   early churches founded in the, ii. 76;
   the islands finally ceded to the Scottish kings, i. 495; iii. 9;
   Norwegian kingdom of the, 28;
   dynasty of Godred Crovan, 31;
   Somerled drives the Norwegians from the mainland, and conquers part
      of the Isles, 31-35;
   summary of their history, ᚬv1 36-39ᚬ.
 Whitby, church council at (A.D. 664), i. 259; ii. 165.
 Whithorn (Whithern, Candida Casa), Roman remains at, i. 72;
   church at, dedicated to St. Martin of Tours, built by St. Ninian, ᚬv1
      130ᚬ, 132;
   principal seat of the Picts of Galloway, 271;
   Pecthelm, first bishop in, 275; ii. 222;
   bishopric of, founded, 224;
   comes to a close, 225.
 Wid (Uid, Foith), i. 242.
 Wight, Isle of, i. 166.
 Wilfrid, St., bishop of York (A.D. 669-678), i. ᚬv1 258-260ᚬ, 275;
    ii. 210;
   dissension with Ecgfrid, i. 262;
   founds the church of Hexham, in honour of St. Andrew, ii. 210;
   temporarily bishop of Lindisfarne, 220;
   expelled from his see of York, 220;
   favoured by the Pope, 220;
   illness in Gaul, 220;
   returns to Britain, 221;
   founds the churches of St. Mary and St. Michael, 221;
   his death, 221.
 William the Conqueror, his conquest of England, i. ᚬv1 417-23ᚬ;
   penetrates into Scotland, and receives homage from Malcolm III. for
      land held in England, 424, 429;
   his son Robert sent by him to Scotland, but forced to retreat, ᚬv1
      427ᚬ;
   William’s death, 428.
 William Fitz Duncan, i. 438.
 William the Lion, crowned at Scone, A.D. 1165, reigns forty-eight
    years, i. 474;
   taken prisoner by the English, 474;
   is liberated, 475;
   arrests an insurrection in Galloway, 475;
   subdues the district of Ross, 475;
   defeats an insurrection headed by Donald Ban Mac William, ᚬv1
      476-79ᚬ;
   subdues Caithness, ᚬv1 479-482ᚬ;
   suppresses an insurrection in Rossshire, 482;
   his death, 483;
   grants by, ii. 393 _seq_.;
   text of the alleged letters-patent granted by him to the Earl of Mar,
      iii. 446.
 Winuaed, river (probably the Avon), where Penda was slain, i. ᚬv1
    254-6ᚬ.
 Wist (Uist), isle of, iii. 430.
 Wrad, son of Bargoit, king of the Picts, i. 309.
 Wrath, Cape, headland of, not mentioned by Ptolemy, i. 70.
 Writing, art of, introduced, ii. 448.
 Wyntoun, prior of Lochleven, quoted, ii. 312, 314, 316;
    iii. 66, 78, 304, 308, _et al_.

 Yarrock, Port (Beruvick), i. v1.
 York, the capital of Deira, i. 237;
   taken possession of by the Danes, 332.
 Yvelchild. _See_ Eadulf.




              -------------------------------------------

        PRINTED BY T. AND A. CONSTABLE, PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY,
                   AT THE EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY PRESS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                      _Works by Mr. W. F. Skene_.

                                   I.

                    =Ancient Gaelic Poetry.=

THE DEAN OF LISMORE’S BOOK. A Selection of Ancient Gaelic Poetry, from a
    Manuscript Collection made by Sir James M‘Gregor, Dean of Lismore,
    in the beginning of the Sixteenth Century. [Introduction and
    Additional Notes.] 1 vol. 8vo, with Facsimiles.

                                  II.

                      =Ancient Chronicles.=

CHRONICLES OF THE PICTS AND SCOTS, and other Early Memorials of Scottish
    History. Published by the Authority of the Lords Commissioners of
    Her Majesty’s Treasury, under the direction of the Lord
    Clerk-Register of Scotland. In 1 vol. 8vo.

                                  III.

                        =John of Fordun.=

FORDUN’S CHRONICLE OF THE SCOTTISH NATION. With English Translation,
    edited with Introduction and Notes. 2 vols. 8vo.

                                  IV.

                       =Cymric Scotland.=

THE FOUR ANCIENT BOOKS OF WALES, containing the Cymric Poems attributed
    to the Bards of the Sixth Century. 2 vols. With Maps and Facsimiles.
    Price 36s.

                                   V.

                      =The Stone of Scone.=

THE CORONATION STONE. Small 4to. With Illustrations in Photography and
    Zincography.

                                  VI.

                       =Celtic Scotland.=

A HISTORY OF ANCIENT ALBAN.

                Book   I. History and Ethnology.
                 ”    II. Church and Culture.
                 ”   III. Land and People.

    In Demy 8vo. Price 15s. each.

                                  VII.

                        =Gospel History.=

THE GOSPEL HISTORY FOR THE YOUNG. Being lessons on the Life of Christ,
    Adapted for use in Families and Sunday Schools. Small crown 8vo, 3
    vols., with Maps, 2s. 6d. each vol., or in cloth box, 7s. 6d. net.


         _Books recently Published in History and Archæology_.

                  ------------------------------------

=The Castellated and Domestic Architecture of Scotland, from the Twelfth
    to the Eighteenth Century.= By DAVID M‘GIBBON and THOMAS ROSS,
    Architects. 4 vols., with about 2000 Illustrations of Ground Plans,
    Sections, Views, Elevations, and Details. Royal 8vo. 42s. each vol.
    net.

=Scotland as It Was and as It Is.= By the DUKE OF ARGYLL. 1 vol. 8vo.
    Illustrated. New Edition. Carefully Revised. 7s. 6d.

=Scotland under her Early Kings.= A History of the Kingdom to the close
    of the 13th century. By E. WILLIAM ROBERTSON. 2 vols. 8vo, 36s.

=Historical Essays.= In connection with the Land and the Church, etc. By
    E. WILLIAM ROBERTSON, Author of “Scotland under her Early Kings.” 1
    vol. 8vo, 10s. 6d.

=The Past in the Present: What is Civilisation?=

    By SIR ARTHUR MITCHELL, K.C.B., M.D., LL.D., etc., Secretary to the
    Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. (Being the Rhind Lectures in
    Archæology for 1876 and 1878.) 1 vol. demy 8vo. with 148 Woodcuts,
    15s.

=Scotland in Early Christian Times.=

    By JOSEPH ANDERSON, LL.D., Keeper of the National Museum of the
    Antiquaries of Scotland. (Being the Rhind Lectures in Archæology for
    1879 and 1880.) 2 vols. 8vo, profusely Illustrated. 12s. each
    volume.

    _Contents of Vol. I_.—Celtic Churches—Monasteries—Hermitages—Round
    Towers—Illuminated Manuscripts—Bells—Crosiers—Reliquaries, etc.

    _Contents of Vol. II_.—Celtic Metal-Work and Sculptured Monuments,
    their Art and Symbolism—Inscribed Monuments in Runics and
    Oghams—Bilingual Inscriptions, etc.

=Scotland in Pagan Times.=

    By JOSEPH ANDERSON, LL.D. (Being the Rhind Lectures in Archæology
    for 1881 and 1882.) 2 vols. 8vo, profusely Illustrated. 12s. each
    volume.

    _Contents of Vol. I_.—THE IRON AGE—Viking Burials and Hoards of
    Silver and Ornaments—Arms, Dress, etc., of the Viking Time—Celtic
    Art of the Pagan Period—Decorated Mirrors—Enamelled
    Armlets—Architecture and Contents of the Brochs—Lake Dwellings—Earth
    Houses, etc.

    _Contents of Vol. II_.—THE BRONZE AND STONE AGES.—Cairn Burial of
    the Bronze Age and Cremation Cemeteries—Urns of Bronze-Age
    Types—Stone Circles—Stone Settings—Gold Ornaments—Implements and
    Weapons of Bronze—Cairn Burial of the Stone Age—Chambered
    Cairns—Urns of Stone-Age Types—Implements and Weapons of Stone.

=Ogham Inscriptions in Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.=

    By the late SIR SAMUEL FERGUSON, President of the Royal Irish
    Academy, Deputy Keeper of the Public Records of Ireland, LL.D.,
    Queen’s Counsel, etc. (Being the Rhind Lectures in Archæology for
    1884.) 1 vol. 8vo, 12s.

=Ecclesiological Notes on some of the Islands of Scotland=: with other
    Papers relating to Ecclesiological Remains on the Scottish Mainland
    and Islands. By THOMAS S. MUIR, Author of “Characteristics of Church
    Architecture,” etc. 1 vol. 8vo, with numerous Illustrations, 21s.

=Archæological Essays.= By the late SIR JAMES SIMPSON, Bart. Edited by
    the late JOHN STUART, LL.D. 2 vols. 4to, 21s.

=The Hill Forts, Stone Circles, and other Structural Remains of Ancient
    Scotland.= By C. MACLAGAN, Lady Associate of the Society of
    Antiquaries of Scotland. With Plans and Illustrations. 1 vol. fol.,
    31s. 6d.

=Kalendars of Scottish Saints.= With Personal Notices of those of Alba,
    etc. By the late ALEXANDER PENROSE FORBES, D.C.L., Bishop of
    Brechin. 1 vol. 4to, price £3, 3s. A few copies for sale on large
    paper, £5, 15s. 6d.

=Researches and Excavations at Carnac (Morbihan), The Bossenno, and Mont
    St. Michel.= By JAMES MILN. 1 vol. royal 8vo, with Maps, Plans, and
    numerous Illustrations in Wood-Engraving and Chromolithography. 42s.

=Reminiscences of Old Edinburgh.=

    By SIR DANIEL WILSON, LL.D., F.R.S.E., President of the University
    of Toronto, Author of “Prehistoric Annals of Scotland,” etc., etc. 2
    vols. post 8vo, 15s.

=Studies in the Topography of Galloway: Being a List of nearly=

    4000 Names of Places, with Remarks on their Origin and Meaning. By
    SIR HERBERT MAXWELL, Bart., M.P. 1 vol. demy 8vo, 14s.

=The History of Liddesdale, Eskdale, Ewesdale, Wauchopedale=, and the
    Debatable Land. Part I., from the Twelfth Century to 1530. By ROBERT
    BRUCE ARMSTRONG. The edition is limited to 275 copies demy quarto,
    and 105 copies on large paper (10 inches by 13). 42s. and 84s.

=Burnt Njal.= From the Icelandic of the Njal’s Saga. By SIR GEORGE WEBB
    DASENT, D.C.L. 2 vols. demy 8vo, with Maps and Plans, 28s.

=Circuit Journeys from 1837 to 1854.=

    By the late LORD COCKBURN. 1 vol. crown 8vo. Second Edition. 6s.

                      ----------------------------

                       EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                             ARCHITECTURAL

                   ARCHÆOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL WORKS

                           RECENTLY PUBLISHED

                            BY DAVID DOUGLAS

     _Five Volumes, Royal 8vo, 42s. net each volume, with about 500
                     Illustrations in each volume_.

                                  THE

                        CASTELLATED AND DOMESTIC

                              ARCHITECTURE

                              OF SCOTLAND

               FROM THE TWELFTH TO THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

                                   BY

                    DAVID MACGIBBON AND THOMAS ROSS

                               ARCHITECTS

[Illustration]

“One of the most important and complete books on Scottish architecture
that has ever been compiled. Its value to the architect, the
archæologist, and the student of styles is at once apparent. It consists
almost exclusively of what may be called illustrated architectural
facts, well digested and arranged, and constituting a monument of
patient research, capable draughtsmanship, and of well-sustained effort,
which do the authors infinite credit.”—_Scotsman._

                             --------------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS

        _One Volume, 8vo, 21s., with nearly 300 Illustrations_.

                          THE ARCHITECTURE OF

                                PROVENCE

                                  AND

                              THE RIVIERA

                                   BY

                            DAVID MACGIBBON

   AUTHOR OF “THE CASTELLATED AND DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE OF SCOTLAND”

[Illustration]

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS




   _Two Volumes 8vo, fully Illustrated, 12s. each (sold separately)_.


                                SCOTLAND

                                   IN

                         EARLY CHRISTIAN TIMES

           _THE RHIND LECTURES IN ARCHÆOLOGY—1879 AND 1880_.

                       BY JOSEPH ANDERSON, LL.D.

      KEEPER OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE ANTIQUARIES OF SCOTLAND

[Illustration]

CONTENTS OF VOL. I.—Celtic Churches—Monasteries—Hermitages—Round
Towers—Illuminated Manuscripts—Bells—Crosiers—Reliquaries, etc.

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.—Celtic Medal-Work and Sculptured Monuments, their
Art and Symbolism—Inscribed Monuments in Runics and Oghams—Bilingual
Inscriptions, etc.

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS




               _One Volume 8vo, fully Illustrated, 12s_.


                                SCOTLAND

                                   IN

                              PAGAN TIMES

                         =The Iron Age=

              _THE RHIND LECTURES IN ARCHÆOLOGY FOR 1881_

                       BY JOSEPH ANDERSON, LL.D.

      KEEPER OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE ANTIQUARIES OF SCOTLAND

[Illustration]

CONTENTS.—_The Iron Age_.—Viking Burials and Hoards of Silver and
Ornaments—Arms, Dress, etc., of the Viking Time—Celtic Art of the Pagan
Period—Decorated Mirrors—Enamelled Armlets—Architecture and Contents of
the Brochs—Lake-Dwellings—Earth Houses, etc.

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS

               _One Volume 8vo, fully Illustrated, 12s_.

                                SCOTLAND

                                   IN

                              PAGAN TIMES

                   =The Bronze and Stone Ages=

              _THE RHIND LECTURES IN ARCHÆOLOGY FOR 1882_

                       BY JOSEPH ANDERSON, LL.D.

                  KEEPER OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE
                        ANTIQUARIES OF SCOTLAND

[Illustration]

                          CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

_The Bronze and Stone Ages_.—Cairn Burial of the Bronze Age and
Cremation Cemeteries—Urns of Bronze Age Types—Stone Circles—Stone
Settings—Gold Ornaments—Implements and Weapons of Bronze—Cairn Burial of
the Stone Age—Chambered Cairns—Urns of Stone Age Types—Implements and
Weapons of Stone.

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS




               _One Volume 8vo, fully Illustrated, 15s_.

                                  THE

                          PAST IN THE PRESENT:

                         WHAT IS CIVILISATION?

                  BY SIR ARTHUR MITCHELL, M.D., LL.D.

[Illustration]

                               CONTENTS.

   I. The Spindle and Whorl.        │ IV. Cave Life.
  II. Craggans and Querns, etc.     │  V. Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages.
 III. Beehive Houses, etc.          │ VI. Superstitions.

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS


                          =William F. Skene.=

Celtic Scotland. A History of Ancient Alban. By WILLIAM F. SKENE,
    D.C.L., LL.D., Historiographer-Royal for Scotland. Second Edition,
    carefully Revised by the Author, with a new Index to the entire
    work. 3 vols. demy 8vo, 45s.

                 Vol.   I. HISTORY AND ETHNOLOGY. 15s.
                 Vol.  II. CHURCH AND CULTURE. 15s.
                 Vol. III. LAND AND PEOPLE. 15s.

“Forty years ago Mr Skene published a small historical work on the
Scottish Highlands which has ever since been appealed to as an
authority, but which has long been out of print. The promise of this
youthful effort is amply fulfilled in the three weighty volumes of his
maturer years. As a work of historical research it ought, in our
opinion, to take a very high rank.”—_Times._


                           =E. W. Robertson.=

Scotland under her Early Kings. A History of the Kingdom to the close of
    the Thirteenth Century. By E. WILLIAM ROBERTSON. 2 vols. demy 8vo,
    cloth, 36s.

Historical Essays, in connection with the Land and the Church, etc. By
    E. WILLIAM ROBERTSON, Author of “Scotland under her Early Kings.” 1
    vol. demy 8vo, 10s. 6d.


                       =Rev. James B. Johnston.=

The Place-Names of Scotland. By the Rev. JAMES B. JOHNSTON, B.D.,
    Falkirk. 1 vol. crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

This book, for which the author has been collecting materials during the
last five years, contains an introduction, general and philological,
followed by a list of the important place-names in Scotland, with
explanations of their meaning, and with their old spellings, each dated
so far as known.


                            =Lord Cockburn.=

Circuit Journeys. By the late LORD COCKBURN, one of the Judges of the
    Court of Session. Second Edition, 1 vol. crown 8vo, 6s.

“One of the best books of reminiscences that have appeared.”—_Morning
Post._

“Delightful alike for its pleasant landscapes; its sound criticisms on
men, law, and books; for its sharp things said in a good-natured
way.”—_Academy._

“Valuable for their topographical descriptions; and they form an
indirect contribution to the social history of Scotland.”—_Scotsman._


                          =Sir Daniel Wilson.=

The Lost Atlantis and other Ethnographic Studies. By Sir DANIEL WILSON,
LL.D., F.R.S.E. 1 vol. demy 8vo, 15s.

_Contents_.—The Lost Atlantis—The Vinland of the Northmen—Trade and
Commerce in the Stone Age—Pre-Aryan American Man—The Æsthetic Faculty in
Aboriginal Races—The Huron-Iroquois: a Typical Race—Hybridity and
Heredity—Relative Racial Brain-Weight and Size.

                               ----------

                       EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS.


               _Two Volumes, Demy 8vo, Illustrated, 25s_.

                             THE HEREDITARY

                          SHERIFFS OF GALLOWAY

                      THEIR “FORBEARS” AND FRIENDS
                THEIR COURTS, AND CUSTOMS OF THEIR TIMES

            WITH NOTES OF THE EARLY HISTORY, ECCLESIASTICAL
                    LEGENDS, THE BARONAGE AND PLACE
                         NAMES OF THE PROVINCE



                              BY THE LATE

                        SIR ANDREW AGNEW, BART.

                               OF LOCHNAW

[Illustration]

                               EDINBURGH:
                    DAVID DOUGLAS, 10 CASTLE STREET
                                  1893


           =ICELANDIC SAGAS, Translated by Sir GEORGE DASENT=

                             --------------

           _Two Volumes, Demy 8vo, with Maps and Plans, 28s_.

                             THE NJALA SAGA

                               BURNT NJAL

                 FROM THE ICELANDIC OF THE NJAL’S SAGA

                                   BY

                    SIR GEORGE WEBBE DASENT, D.C.L.

[Illustration: Graysteel]

                             --------------

_Small 4to, with Illustrations, 7s. 6d_.

                            _THE GISLI SAGA_

                            GISLI THE OUTLAW

                           FROM THE ICELANDIC

                                   BY

                    SIR GEORGE WEBBE DASENT, D.C.L.

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS


                 _Demy 4to, Illustrated, 42s. and 84s_.

                                  THE

                         HISTORY OF LIDDESDALE

                    ESKDALE, EWESDALE, WAUCHOPEDALE

                                AND THE

                            DEBATEABLE LAND

           =Part E. from the Twelfth Century to 1530=

                                   BY

                         ROBERT BRUCE ARMSTRONG

[Illustration: CRUKILTON CASTLE]

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS


                 _One Volume 8vo, Illustrated, 7s. 6d_.

                                SCOTLAND

                         AS IT WAS AND AS IT IS

                                 BY THE

                             DUKE OF ARGYLL

[Illustration: ROB ROY’S HOUSE, GLENSHIRA]

                A HISTORY OF RACES, OF MILITARY EVENTS,
                      AND OF THE RISE OF COMMERCE

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS


                        _Two Volumes 4to, 21s_.

                          ARCHÆOLOGICAL ESSAYS

                              BY THE LATE

                      SIR JAMES Y. SIMPSON, BART.


                           EDITED BY THE LATE

                           JOHN STUART, LL.D.

             AUTHOR OF THE “SCULPTURED STONES OF SCOTLAND”

[Illustration: ANCIENT ORATORY IN THE ISLAND OF INCHCOLM]

                               CONTENTS.

 1. Archæology.                     │6. Leprosy and Leper Hospitals.
 2. Inchcolm.                       │7. Greek Medical Vases.
 3. The Cat Stane.                  │8. Was the Roman Army provided
 4. The Magical Charm-Stones.       │  with Medical Officers
 5. Pyramid of Gizeh.               │9. Roman Medicine Stamps, etc.,
                                    │  etc.

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS


                   _Two Volumes, Demy 8vo, 19s. 6d_.

                              SOCIAL LIFE

                             IN FORMER DAYS

                    CHIEFLY IN THE PROVINCE OF MORAY

           =Illustrated by Letters and Family Papers=


                          BY E. DUNBAR DUNBAR

                      LATE CAPTAIN 21ST FUSILIERS

[Illustration: THUNDERTON HOUSE.]

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS


                   _One Volume, Demy 8vo, price 14s_.

                            EARLY TRAVELLERS

                              IN SCOTLAND

                               1295-1689


                               EDITED BY

                             P. HUME BROWN

                AUTHOR OF ‘THE LIFE OF GEORGE BUCHANAN’

[Illustration]

                               ----------

                               EDINBURGH:

                    DAVID DOUGLAS, 10 CASTLE STREET.


                            =P. Hume Brown.=

George Buchanan, Humanist and Reformer: a Biography. By P. HUME BROWN.
    Demy 8vo, 12s.

“There is, perhaps, no eminent Scotsman who has stood in better need of
an impartial and scholarly biography than George Buchanan; and Mr Hume
Brown is to be congratulated on having in the present volume produced a
model of its kind.”—_Scotsman._

Tours in Scotland, 1677 and 1681. By THOMAS KIRK and RALPH THORESBY.
    Edited by P. HUME BROWN. Demy 8vo, 5s.

A lucky accident having brought these two interesting narratives to
light since the “Early Travellers in Scotland” was published, it was
thought desirable to reprint them uniform with that book.

Scotland Before 1700. From Contemporary Documents. Forming a Companion
    Volume to “Early Travellers in Scotland.” By P. HUME BROWN, Author
    of “The Life of George Buchanan,” &c. Demy 8vo, 14s.

                            =Bishop Forbes.=

Kalendars of Scottish Saints. With Personal Notices of those of Alba,
    etc. By ALEXANDER PENROSE FORBES, D.C.L., Bishop of Brechin. 4to,
    price £3, 3s. A few copies for sale on large paper, £5, 15s. 6d.

“A truly valuable contribution to the archæology of
Scotland.”—_Guardian._

                           =Thomas S. Muir.=

Ecclesiological Notes on some of the Islands of Scotland, with other
    Papers relating to Ecclesiological Remains on the Scottish Mainland
    and Islands. By THOMAS S. MUIR, Author of “Characteristics of Church
    Architecture,” etc. Demy 8vo, with numerous Illustrations, 21s.

                         =Sir Samuel Ferguson.=

Ogham Inscriptions in Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. By the late SIR
    SAMUEL FERGUSON, President of the Royal Irish Academy, Deputy Keeper
    of the Public Records of Ireland, LL.D., Queen’s Counsel, etc.
    (Being the Rhind Lectures in Archæology for 1884.) 1 vol. demy 8vo,
    12s.

                            =Miss Maclagan.=

The Hill Forts, Stone Circles, and other Structural Remains of Ancient
    Scotland. By C. MACLAGAN, Lady Associate of the Society of
    Antiquaries of Scotland. With Plans and Illustrations. Folio, 31s.
    6d.

“We need not enlarge on the few inconsequential speculations which rigid
archæologists may find in the present volume. We desire rather to
commend it to their careful study, fully assured that not only they, but
also the general reader, will be edified by its perusal.”—_Scotsman._

                         =Prof. Baldwin Brown.=

From Schola to Cathedral. A Study of Early Christian Architecture in its
    relation to the life of the Church. By G. BALDWIN BROWN, Professor
    of Fine Art in the University of Edinburgh. Demy 8vo, Illustrated,
    7s. 6d.

The book treats of the beginnings of Christian Architecture, from the
point of view of recent discoveries and theories, with a special
reference to the outward resemblance of early Christian communities to
other religious associations of the time.

                           =Patrick Dudgeon.=

A Short Introduction to the Origin of Surnames. By PATRICK DUDGEON,
    Cargen. Small 4to, 3s. 6d.

                               ----------

                        EDINBURGH: DAVID DOUGLAS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

39.21: The date 1315 referred to in “...when Edward the First placed the
whole of Scotland under four justiciaries in 1315.” was hand-corrected
in our source text, and is obviously incorrect. Edward I died in 1307.
In 1305, Edward I re-organized the administration of Scotland under
English rule, promulgating the order in September, 1305 (_Edward I in
Scotland: 1296-1305_, Fiona Jane Watson, 1999, University of Glasgow,
Ph.D. Thesis..)

298.8: The chronology given regarding the Earl of Ross, on p. 298 (“He
appears, however, to have entered into a league with the earls of
Douglas and Crawford, in 1455, for the dethronement of that monarch, but
died in 1449...”) is suspect. The year 1445, most likely, would have
been intended. Douglas and Crawford were indeed opposed to James II at
that time.

Names frequently appear with some variation of spelling, and given the
fluidity of vowels in Gaelic, Anglic, and Latin, these have usually been
retained.

Errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected, and
are noted here. The references in the table below are to the page and
line in the original.

There are a number of instances of quotations being unopened, unclosed
or otherwise mispunctuated. Closure is sometimes not obvious, and where
possible the original sources were consulted. Skene often begins with
quotation and continues in paraphrase without clearly marking such.
Where it is not clear, these have been corrected and noted as
‘Probable.’




  x.17     E[a]rldoms of Ross and Carrick,                Inserted.
  14.28    in sea, river, and lake.[’]                    Added.
  64.30    his co[m/n]firmation of the grants             Replaced.
  65.1     monastery of Du[m/n]fermline                   Replaced.
  91.20    fa[s/n]tastic creations of the popular mind    Replaced.
  101.2    above the mead vessels[”]                      Removed.
  101.22   adorned with the purple;[’]                    Added.
  116.24   dashed out his brains.[’]                      Added.
  117.14   people of the Levenach or Lennox.[’]           Probable.
  127.15   and two of his succes[s]ors                    Inserted.
  150.34   _Battle of Maghra[l/t]h_                       Replaced.
  158.19   [(]the town of the Chlinnes)                   Added.
  161.13   and O’Docomhlan over [Rinnna] h-Eignide        _sic_
  165.24   the _Tuogh_ of Braden [Iland]                  _sic_
  168.15   Tirkennedy, Knockrinie[./,] and Lough Lurgh.   Replaced.
  182.8    whole number of seventeen was comp[ /l]eted    Restored.
  194.24   He is said to have had [‘]twenty-four sons     Probable.
  205.31   there is no propriate share of land;[’]        Added.
  228.5    free of [‘]_Can_ et _Cuneveth_                 Added.
  235.20   of our lord the king;[’]                       Added.
  243.24   grants to the monks of Arbroath [‘]two bovates Probable.
           of land
  246.11   their respective partisans which               Transposed.
           accompa[in/ni]ed it
  253.17   while in [1]358 one-half of the thanage        Almost
                                                          certainly.
  301.14   to Neill mac[ ]Neill                           Inserted.
  309.25   The second group of the Mowats and Cowt[t]s    Removed.
  366.11   to the late John Lachlan Mac[g]illivray        Inserted.
  378.7    upon this farm the[ir/re] were besides         Replaced.
  398.35   Giolla Og[h]amhnan was begotten of Solomh      Inserted.
  450.36   [‘]Caterina Comitissa Orcadiae et Cathanesiae  Added.
           ’
  482.5    Niall more[o]ver had two sons                  Inserted.
  494.3    Manuis oig[./ ]mic                             Period
                                                          removed.
  512.21   Fothad, second bishop of [Alban, ii. ]Alban,   Removed.
           ii.
  517.46   heads an insurrection[rection]                 Removed.
  523.21   and in [a]nother five years                    Added.
  528.3    give way before fe[n/u]dal forms               Inverted.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74710 ***
